AT the West-end and South-side of this Chapel is a large plain Stone of grey Marble, composed of seven Stones, four make the sides, two the Ends, and one the Cover; this plain and rough Monument was placed over the glorious King Edward the I. 

[...]

Hearing the Scots had rose and shook off their Allegiance, he marched against them, but, being afflicted with a Disentery, or bloody Flux, he returned to Carlisle, where sending for his Son, Prince Edward, he gave him, in strict Charge, that he should carry his Bones about him through Scotland, till he had brought it to Subjection. 2dly [secondly], That he should send his Heart to the holy Land with 140 Knights, and the 32000 l. he had provided to that Purpose, and that he should not recall Gavestone from Banishment, neither of which the Prince performed. After which proceeding on his Journey he fell ill at Borough, or Burgh upon the Sands in Cumberland, the 7th of July Anno 1307, but according to Wyke's, by mistake 1304, having reigned thirty four Years, seven Months and twenty one Days, and lived 68. After his Death, Peter of Spain the Cardinal made solemn Processions, and gave a Year's Indulgence to all saying Paternoster and ave Maria for the King's Soul, whose Death Robert Archbishop of Canterbury is said to have seen in a Vision being then at Rome; his Body was brought to Waltham and there remained fifteen Weeks. Walshingham says six, every Week the neighbouring Monasterics sending six Monks, or Canons to wait Day and Night round his Body, whence being conveyed in a solemn and magnificent manner to London, he was interr'd here on 28 Octob. being St. Simon and Jude's Day ; Anthony Patriarch of Jerusalem, and Bishop of Durham performing his exequies. On the North-side of his Tomb, are these Words painted in black, as I suppose, not long since, and under them the Stone rubbed where, 'tis probable, was the original Inscription, of which this is a Copy:

Edwardus primus Scotorum malleus hic est 1308. pactum serva.

There was so great respect paid to his Memory, that so long after as Richard the II. Time, his great Grandson, there was an Order to renew the Cerecloths for preserving his Body, which is as follows. 

Rex Thesaurario & Camerariis suis salutem. Mandamus vobis quod ceram circa corpus celebris memoria Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae progenitoris nostri filii Regis Henrici, in Ecclesia beati Petri Westmonasterium humatum de donariis nostris renovari facietis, prout hactenus fieri constituit. Teste rege apud Westmonasterium. II. die Julii.

In English thus : The King to his Treasurer and Chamberlains greeting, We command you that the Cerements round the Body of our Progenitor, of celebrated Memory, Edward, late King of England, Son of King Henry, which Prince lies burial in the Church of St. Peter at Westminster, be renewed at our cost, as hath heretofore been accustomed. Witness the King at Westminster, 11th of July. 