[1818]
Sunday, 17. After breakfast, set off to the Abbey De l'Espan: in my way there, on the outskirts of the town, by the cathedral of St. Julian, observed a curiosity, a white monk: although it was a hot day, he was so muffled up by his cowl, that I did not see his face. Found the queen, Berengaria, as I left her the year before, with as much corn over her. Returned to Le Mans much mortified, but with a resolution not to leave the place without accomplishing the object of my visit. To fill up time till I could see M. Toret, the proprietor of De l'Espan, I went to the Abbey De la Couture in the town, to search for the tomb of Helie Comte de Mans: found the stone which contained the inscription, and thinking that the figure itself might not be far off, went to the sacristan; he told me he had only a faint recollection of it; pointed out the place where it had been, and said, he believed it was entirely destroyed during the Revolution; but added, that he thought there was a picture of this Helie in the Museum of the Prefecture. The conviction instantly flashed across my mind what this picture was, and on the strength of it, I gave the man a franc for his information: I went straight to the Museum, though it was Sunday; as a foreigner I got admitted, and there found what I expected, not Helie, but Geoffrey le Bel, (surnamed Plantagenet,) Comte de Mans, and father of Henry II. Went from thence to M. Daudin, to gain permission to make a drawing; this he granted, and at the same time took me into his study, and showed me an immense collection of Roman antiquities, all found on building the Pont Royal, some years since. At one o'clock, went to M. Toret, who agreed to remove the wheat, which concealed Berengere, and made an engagement for that purpose at eight on Tuesday morning. At four o'clock, left Mans a second time, in an opposite direction, crossing the river by the Pont Royal, taking the road towards Sable, and sandy enough I found it; although I might have found it more so, had I been going farther than Estival, the abbey at that place being my object. Finding myself extremely thirsty, I entered an auberge on the road, and called for a glass of water, qualifying it with one of their thimbles of eau de vie: here sat the countrymen and the master of the house, drinking eau de vie. The latter I could not tell at first what to make of, for he had all the appearance of a madman; he was roaring, stamping, and bawling in a manner that quite alarmed me: he was drunk, and these were his expressions of loyalty, in shouting Vive le roi! but so inarticulately, that I should not have discovered it, had I not been informed: this was the first Frenchman I had seen in this state; and if they are all, when so, like this man, it is fortunate instances occur so seldom. Having arrived at Estival, and finding it, like many other expeditions of the same nature in France, fruitless, I retraced my steps back to Mans, distant two leagues and a half, and did not enter that place till after dark; completely knocked up with this day's exertion, added to the remains of travelling fatigue the day and night before. 