The effigy of John, carved in grey marble, which forms the superstructure of his present tomb, was originally the lid of the stone coffin that contained his remains, and in its first position must have been placed on a level with the floor of the building within which he was interred. His head is adorned with a crown of state and supported by two Bishops, undoubtedly intended for Oswald and Wulstan, between whose remains he, as beforementioned, actually reposed. He is represented as wearing a dalmatic of crimson lined with green, the neck and cuffs edged with a gold and jewelled border; his tunic is yellow, or cloth of gold; he is girt with a belt; on his hands arc jewelled gloves, a ring on the middle finger of his right hand, which supports a sceptre, while his left grasps a sword. He wears red hose, golden spurs, his feet have on them black shoes, and rest upon a lion. The greater part of these details will be recognized as the ensigns of royalty. 

Valentine Green, F. S. A., the historian of Worcester, published a pamphlet, giving a very interesting account of the opening of the tomb of King John on the 17th of July 1797. Two walls of brick were found to form the supporters of the effigy of the monarch. The coffin containing his remains, of which it had originally formed the top, was covered with two strong elm planks, the intervening spaces between the sides of the tomb and the effigy, being filled up with mortar and brick rubbish. These circumstances, and the state of the King’s mortal relics, shewed that they had been at some previous time disturbed, and seem to favour the conjecture of their having been translated from the Lady Chapel in the Cathedral into the Choir, most probably about the time of Henry the Seventh, as the altar tomb, on which the coffin lid lies, resembles the monument of Prince Arthur in the same Church, and brick was much employed in architecture about that period. The skull was found turned completely round, and presented what anatomists term the foramen magnum, or aperture through which the spinal marrow passes. The upper jaw lay near the right elbow. The agreement of the dress on the body with that of the effigy on the tomb was very remarkable, and shews, as in the instance of Henry the Second's figure, that these effigies very faithfully represented the defunct as he lay in state. John had, however, no crown on his head or gloves on his hands; in the place of the former was found the celebrated monk’s cowl, confirming the minute accuracy of the Chronicles. This sacred envelope fitted the head very closely, and had been buckled under the chin by straps, parts of which still remained. The body had been covered with a crimson robe of damask of strong texture, reaching from the neck to the feet: see the effigy. Part of the embroidery was still perfect near the left knee. His left arm was bent towards his breast, and the hand had grasped a sword in the same manner as on the tomb. The cuff of this arm still remained lying on the breast. The sword was much decomposed and its parts found at intervals down the left side, the scabbard was much more perfect. The covering of the legs (the precise nature of which was not ascertained) was tied round the ancles. These were probably the red hose seen in the effigy. Thus lay royal John, as the immortal dramatizer of his reign has said

— but now a king — now thus—
A clod and module of confounded royally!

Matthew Paris has given the following as his epitaph, which, like many others of the same cast on our early Kings, had perhaps a place in the Chronicle, but not on the tomb:

Hoc in sarcophago sepelitur Regis imago,
Qui moriens multum sedavit in orbe tumultum,
Et cui connexa dum vixit probra manebant,
Hunc mala post mortem timor est ne fata sequantur,
Qui legis haec metuens dum cernis te moriturum,
Discite quid rerum pariat tibi meta dierum.

['In this sarcophagus is entombed the figure of the king,
who dying calmed much tumult in the world,
and for whom connected disgraceful acts dogged while he lived.
There is fear that evil fates should follow him after death,
You who read this, fearing while you realise that you will die,
Know what things the end of days might prepared for you.']