THE second of our monarchs who lies here, is the renowned Edward I. in an altar tomb, as modest and plain, as his fame was great. A long inscription in monkish lines imperfectly records the deeds of the conqueror of Scotland, and of the ancient Britons. In 1770, antiquarian curiosity was so urgent with the respectable dean of Westminster, as to prevale on him to permit certain members of the society, under proper regulations, to inspect the remains of this celebrated hero; and discover, if possible, the composition which gave such duration to the human body. The writs 'de cera renovanda circa corpus regis Edwardi primi ['concerning the renewing cere-cloth around the body of King Edward the First']' being extant, gave rise to this search. 

In the minute relation by that able and worthy antiquary the late Sir Joseph Ayloffe, almost every particular is given. On lifting up the lid of the tomb, the royal body was found wrapped in a strong thick linen cloth, wared on the inside the head and face were covered with a sudarium or face-cloth of crimson sarcenet, wrapped into three folds, conformable to the napkin used by our Saviour in his way to his crucifixion, as we are assured by the church of Rome. On flinging open the external mantle, the corpse was discovered in all the ensigns of majesty, richly habited. The body was wrapped in a fine linen cere-cloth, closely fitted to every part, even to the very fingers and face. Over the cere-cloth was a tunic of red silk damask; above that a stole of thick white tissue crossed the breast, and on this, at six inches distance from each other, quatre-foils of philligree work, of gilt metal set with false stones, imitating rubies, sapphires, amethysts, &c.; and the intervals between the quatre-foils on the stole, powdered with minute white beads, tacked down into a most elegant embroidery, in form not unlike what is called the true lover's knot. Above these habits was the royal mantle of rich crimson sattin, fastened on the left shoulder with a magnificent fibula, of gilt metal richly chased, and ornamented with four pieces of red, and four of blue, transparent paste, and twenty-four more pearls. The corpse, from the waist downwards, was covered with a rich cloth of figured gold, which fell down to the feet and was tucked beneath them. On the back of each hand was a quatre-foil like those on the stole. In his right hand was a sceptre with a cross of copper gilt, and of elegant workmanship, reaching to the right shoulder. In the left hand the rod and dove, which passed over the shoulder and reached the royal ear. The dove stood on a ball placed on three ranges of oak leaves of enamelled green; it was of white enamel. On the head was a crown charged with trefoils made of gilt metal. The head was lodged in the cavity of the stone-coffin, always observable in those receptacles of the dead. I refer the reader to the Archaeologia for the other minutiæ attendant on the habiting of the royal corpse. It was dressed in conformity to ancient usage, even as early as the time of the Saxon Sebert. The use of the cere-cloth is continued to our days: in the instance of our late king, the two serjeant-surgeons had 122l. 8s. 9d. each for opening and embalming; and the apothecary 1521. for a fine double cere-cloth, and a due quantity of rich perfumed aromatic powders.

ELEANOR of Castile, the beautiful and affectionate queen of Edward, was in 1290 deposited here. Her figure, in copper gilt, rests on a tablet of the same, placed on an altar tomb of Petworth marble. 