Mr Rochead, the architect of the Wallace Monument, &c., in a communication to Mr J. M. Mitchell, F.S.A. Scot., Belgian Consul-General,
thus writes: 

“The area of the building at Cambuskenneth, as far as disclosed to our view on the first day of the excavations, is of the most interesting description, and exhibits the splayed base lines of the north side of the abbey, being perfectly sharp and fresh as when built, and of an early though somewhat curious character. By the insertion of the ovolo a curved character of the upper member (A) of the splay base, the roll moulding (B) just above is a very conclusive evidence, along with the other parts below, of early pointed work, having quite a different character, so to speak, from that known as early English pointed Gothic.

The Cambuskenneth Abbey ruins, as indeed I will venture to say from my intimate acquaintance with Continental pointed architecture, partake of the French model largely, as indeed does the whole ecclesiastical architecture of our country; hence the blending of the baronial character in our abbeys and churches; and in illustration of this fact I would point to Stirling High Church, parts of Dunfermline Abbey, Inchcolme Abbey and Monastery (Firth of Forth), and the deeply interesting remains of Inchmahome Priory or Monastery, founded 1328, at Port of Monteath; and let me add one other instance, the old church of Linlithgow, as strongly corroborative examples of homogeneity of style of French example and extraction. 

“The base lines of Cambuskenneth Abbey are from three to three feet six inches high, and so fresh are the surfaces of the stone splayed faces, that they carry the incised masonic marks of the artisan who cut and fashioned the stone, as perfectly as if done but yesterday. At our first visit portions of the great stools of the piers that carried or may have carried an imposing tower and spire were uncovered, exhibiting a very peculiar formation and character of base moulding, in most excellent preservation, section and plan thus (see Plate LV., No. 2); the base moulding above is all that is left, that is, so far as was uncovered at the first visit. The pavement of the area of the nave was partially laid bare, and near it we discovered the section line of some four or five steps, leading from the nave of the western portion of the abbey into the choir, close to the entrance of which stands what seems to have been a magnificent sepulchral vault, the cell of which, roughly speaking, may be about from seven to eight feet long, by four feet broad or thereby, having thick walls all round, carefully built, and throwing projections out from these lines of walls as if light buttresses had formed a portion of the design of the elaborate shrine that undoubtedly must have surmounted the whole tomb; if we are to judge from the large mass of fragmentary and smashed-up heaps of foliated capitals, and six-inch diameter shafting, moulded bases and mid-shaft clasps that were dug up all around the fine tomb, out of which, and at about three or four feet deep (from base lines of tomb), was excavated the remains of at least one male skeleton having a finely developed skull, thigh bones, &c., all in a high state of preservation. Near to or around this tomb were found some four or five elongated encaustic tiles, red and blue, and yellow glazed, say about eight or nine inches long, five inches broad, by one and three quarters of an inch thick. A specimen of fragmentary stained glass, bearing marks as if partially fused by fire, was found, likewise a silver sixpence of the time of Edward II., on the morning of our visit. I hope still further to see the progress and to witness the finish of this most interesting work of research and discovery.” 