In 1816 he [Stothard] was deputed by that body to commence his elaborate and faithful drawings of the famous Tapestry deposited at Bayeux. During his absence in France he visited Chinon, and in the neighbouring Abbey of Fontevraud discovered those interesting Effigies of the Plantagenets, the existence of which after the revolutionary devastation had become doubtful, but which were of high importance to him as subjects for his work. The following account of this matter is given in Mrs. C. Stothard's Tour in Britanny:— “When Mr. Stothard first visited France, during the summer of 1816, he came direct to Fontevraud, to ascertain if the Effigies of our early Kings who were buried there yet existed; subjects so interesting to English history were worthy of the inquiry. He found the abbey converted into a prison, and discovered in a cellar belonging to it, the Effigies of Henry the Second and his Queen Eleanor of Guienne, Richard the First, and Isabella of Angouleme, the Queen of John. The chapel where the figures were placed before the revolution had been entirely destroyed, and these valuable Effigies, then removed to the cellar, were subject to continual mutilation from the prisoners, who came twice in every day to draw water from a well. It appeared they had sustained some injury, as Mr. S. found several broken fragments scattered around. He made drawings of the figures; and upon his return to England represented to our Government the propriety of securing such interesting memorials from further destruction. It was deemed advisable, if such a plan could be accomplished, to gain possession of them, that they might be placed with the rest of our Royal Effigies in Westminster Abbey.” An application was accordingly made, which failed; but it had the good effect of drawing the attention of the French authorities towards these remains, and saving them from total destruction. At the same period Mr. Stothard visited the Abbey of L’Espan, near Mans, in search of the effigy of Berengaria, Queen of Richard the First: he found the abbey church converted into a barn, and the object of his inquiry in a mutilated state, concealed under a quantity of wheat! At Mans he discovered the beautiful enamelled tablet representing Geoffrey Plantagenet. Mr. Stothard’s drawings of the Effigies of the English Monarchy extant in France, were, on his return from Fontevraud, submitted by the late Sir George Nayler to the inspection of his late Majesty George the Fourth, who was graciously pleased to express an earnest desire for their publication, and to allow Mr. Stothard to dedicate his Work, the Monumental Effigies, to him. In 1817 he made a second journey to Bayeux for the purpose of continuing his drawings from the Tapestry.