[1214] William departed this life, full of goodly days, and at a good old age, charging his familiar friends and officers about paying back all debts and services in full, as became a good prince. And fully armed with thorough devoutness, a clear shrift, true charity, the viaticum of Christ's body, and the rest of the sacraments, while his kingdom abode in the deepest peace, breathed he out his last breath, in a blissful end, and flitted to Christ's presence, we trust, about the third hour of the night, on Thursday, the 4th of December, in the aforesaid year the forty-ninth of his reign, and the seventy-fourth of his age. 

[...]

The next day after the kings death, very early in the morning, while Walter, bishop of Glasgow, Robert, elect of Ross, the queen, William of Boscho, the chancellor and a good many of his household, abode with the deceased kings body, the Earls of Fife, Stratherne, Atholl, Angus, Menteith, Buchan, and Lothian, together with William, bishop of St. Andrews, took the king's son, Alexander, a lad of sixteen years and a half; and, bringing him as far as Scone, they raised him to the throne, in honour and peace, with the approval of God and man, and with more grandeur and glory than any one until then; while all wished him joy, and none gainsaid him. So King Alexander, as was meet, held his feast in state, at Scone, on that day (that is to say, Friday), and the Saturday following (namely, the Feast of St. Nicholas), as well as the next Sunday. On the Monday, at the bridge of Perth, he met his father's body, which was being taken down, in great state, to Abirbroth (Arbroath), to be buried, as the king himself, before his death, had directed. And thus, followed by all the nobility of the whole kingdom, save a few of the nobles who guarded the uttermost parts of the kingdom, William, the kindly king of Scots, and to be had in kindly remembrance for everlasting, was buried on Wednesday, the 10th of December, in front of the high altar, in the church of the monastery of Abirbrothoc (Arbroath), which he had himself caused to be built up from the very foundations, to the honour of God and Saint Thomas the Martyr, Archbishop of Canterbury ; and which he had, after endowing it with many estates and possessions, committed to the monks of Kalkhow (Kelso). May God be gracious unto his soul! Amen.