The repeated burnings of [Holyrood] Abbey by the English army were doubtless the chief cause of the curtailment of the church to its present diminished size; yet abundant evidence remains to show that the choir and transepts were in existence fully a quarter of a century later, and that had the necessary exertions been then made for its repair, we might still have possessed the ancient building in its original and magnificent proportions, instead of the ruined nave, which alone remains to show what once had been. In "the heads of the accusation and chief offences laid to Adam, Bishop of Orknay, his charge," by the General Assembly of 1569, the fifth is, that "all the said kirks, for the most part, wherein Christ's evangell may be preached, are decayed, and made, some sheepfolds, and some so ruinous, that none dare enter into them for fear of falling; specially Halrudhouse, although the bishop of Sanct Andrews, in time of papistry, sequestrate the whole rents of the said abbacy, because only the glassen windows were not holden up and repaired." To this the Bishop replied, "That the Abbay Church of Halyrudhouse hath been, these 20 years bygane, ruinous through decay of two principall pillars, so that none were assured under it; and two thousand pounds bestowed upon it would not be sufficient to ease men to the hearing of the word, and ministration of the sacraments. But with their consent, and help of ane established authority, he was purposed to provide the means, that the superfluous ruinous parts, to wit, the Queir and Croce Kirk, might be disponed be faithfull men, to repair the remanent sufficiently." The Bishop's economical plan was no doubt put in force, and the whole of the choir and transept soon after demolished and sold, to provide funds for converting the nave into the Parish Kirk of the Canongate. The two western pillars, designed to support a great central tower, now form the sides of the east window constructed within the arch, and an examination of the masonry with which the lower parts of this and the side arches are closed, shows that it is entirely built with fragments of clustered shafts and other remains of the ruins. It was at this time, we presume, that the new royal vault was constructed in the south aisle of the nave, and the remains of the Scottish kings removed from their ancient resting-place near the high altar of the Abbey Church. It is built against the ancient Norman doorway of the cloisters, which still remains externally, with its beautiful shafts and zigzag mouldings, an undoubted relic of the original fabric of St David. The cloisters appear to have enclosed a large court, formed in the angle of the nave and south transept. The remains of the north side are clearly traceable still, and the site of the west side is now occupied by the Palace buildings. Here was the ambulatory for the old monks, when the magnificent foundation of St David retained its pristine splendour, and it remained probably till the burning of the Abbey after the death of James V. We learn on the occasion of the marriage of James IV. with the Princess Margaret of England, that "after all reverences doon at the Church, in ordere as before, the Kyng transported himself to the Pallais, through the clostre, holdynge always the Queen by the body, and hys hed bare, till he had brought hyr within her chammer." 