It might seem astonishing that Warton, Descript. p. 81, and the Anonymous Historian, vol. I, p. 54, should so positively assert that there are on the north partition wall [at Winchester], epitaphs in verse, which they insert in their books, on bishop Alwyn and queen Emma, when no such verses exist, or could have existed at the time they wrote; did not we clearly discover, that instead of making use of their own eye sight, in describing a cathedral, which they had so often occasion to enter, they copied Gale's short History of the Cathedral, published in the year 1715. It may, however, still be asked, how Gale himself came by these epitaphs? The only way of solving this difficulty, and of vindicating the truth of the inscriptions, on two of the chests above described, is, by supposing that the lines in question were inscribed upon the leaden coffins of the said personages, or upon some monument near them, in the ancient choir, before the renewal of it by Fox; and that having met with these lines in some old manuscript, or other account of the choir, in its former state, he supposed them still to exist there. — Having made this observation, we will here, in the notes, give the several epitaphs; not doubting of their being genuine, and that they were to be seen, in part of the choir, 300 years ago. That of bishop Alwin, guardian of Emma, and afterwards monk, sacristan, and bishop of this church, was as follows: — 

Hic Jacet Alwini corpus, qui muncia nobis
Contulit egregia, parrito Christe pio.

'Here lies the body of Alwin, who bestowed many noble presents upon us. Have mercy, O Christ, upon thy pious servant.' 

The epitaph of Emma contained an abstract of her history in the following lines: 

Hic Emmam cista Reginam continet ista. 
Durit Etheldredus Rex hanc, et postea, Cnutus. 
Edwardum parit haec, ac Hardi-canutum.
Quatuor hos reges vidit sceptra tenentes.
Anglorum Reguem fuit haec sic mater et uxor. 

The sense of this epitaph may be thus rendered into English: 'Here rests, in this chest, queen Emma. She was first married to king Ethelred, and afterwards to king Canute. To the former she bore Edward to the latter Hardicanute. She saw all these four kings wielding the royal sceptre: and thus was the wife and mother of English kings.'

Two other epitaphs for bishops of this see are to be met with in Gale, which are transcribed by Warton and his follower the Anonymous. The first of these also occurs in Godwin, though it certainly was never to be seen in the cathedral, since the alterations made by Fox in the chests and partition wall. This is to the joint memory of Elmstan, or Helmstad, the predecessor of St. Swithun, and of Kynulph or Elsius, who had been a monk, before he became bishop of this cathedral in 1006, and stood thus:— 

Pontifices haec capsa duos tenet incineratos
Primus Elmstanus, huic successoraue Kynulphus.

'This chest contains two prelates now reduced to ashes, Elmstan, and his successor Kynulph.' 

The other epitaph was inscribed on the leaden coffin of the noble and learned, but ambitious prelate, Alfymus, or Elsinus; who, being raised from the see of Winchester to that of Canterbury, perished in the snow upon the Alps, whilst on his way to Rome to procure the metropolitical pall. His body being brought back to England, was buried in his cathedral of Winchester, over which was afterwards placed this epitaph: 

Alfymus plumbo praesul requiescit in isto.

In English: 'In this lead reposes bishop Alfymus.'

We must not forget to mention the original epitaph of the great Canute, who was first buried before the high altar, which Trussel informs us was the following jingling line: — 

Doribus inclutus jacet hic rex nomine Cnutus. 

'Here lies king Canute, illustrious for his conduct. '