Upon the top of these partition walls are ranged six mortuary chests, containing the mortal remains of different princes or other personages, eminent for their rank or merits; most of whom are entitled to the peculiar respect of Englishmen and of Christians. The present chests, the work of bishop [Richard] Fox, are composed of wood, carved, painted, and gilt. They are also surmounted with crowns, and inscribed with the names, and epitaphs in verse of the princes whose bones they contain. It is an unquestionable fact, though it has escaped the observation of all former writers, who have mentioned this subject in latter times, that bishop [Henry] de Blois, in the 12th century, first collected the remains of the most illustrious princes and prelates, who had been buried in the cathedral, and deposited them in certain coffins of lead, which he placed over the Holy Hole, most probably, in the same situations, which the present wooden chests occupy. At the time when the choir was taken down and rebuilt, at the beginning of the 16th century, there was a necessity of removing these coffins; which being probably found too numerous, and not sufficiently elegant, for the situation, which they were intended to occupy, bishop Fox caused the present wooden chests to be made, to the number of six, one to be placed over each arch of the partition. In four of these he deposited the remains of the illustrious princes, to be mentioned beneath, being those those which fortunately could be ascertained. The last chest on each side he filled with the bones of other great personages, which had probably been mixed and confounded together ever since their first translation, almost four centuries before his time ; and, in all appearance, burying a second time, time those of different princes and prelates, who were less celebrated for their merits and benefactions to the cathedral.

The first chest from the altar, on the north side, contains two skeletons, those of the first Christian king of the West Saxons, Kynegils, founder of the cathedral, and of the pious king Ethelwolph, here called Adulphus, who was once a subdeacon of the cathedral, and afterwards its great benefactor, and the father of the great Alfred. It is inscribe on one side: 'Rex Kyngils obit ['King Kyngils dies'] A.D. 641.' and on the other, 'Adulphus Rex, obit ['King Adulphus dies'] A.D. 857.' The epitaph is the same on both sides, viz. 'Kyngilsi in cista hac simul ossa jacent et Adulphi. Ipsus fundator, hic benefactor erat.' ['The bones of Kyngils and of Adolphus lie together in this chest. The founder himself, he was a benefactor here.']

The second chest, on the same side, contains also two entire skeletons, as they appear to be. One of them is that of Kenewalch, here called Kenulph, the son of Kinegils, and the real builder of the cathedral at the Saxon conversion; the other that of the founder of the English monarchy, the great Egbert, On one side the chest is inscribed, 'Kenulphus Rex, obit A.D. 714 ['King Kenulph, dies in the year of the lord 714']'; on the other side, 'Egbertus Rex, Obit A.D.837 ['King Egbert, dies in the year of the lord 837']'. The epitaph is as follows : — 'Hic rex Egbertus pausat cum rege Kenulpho, Nobis egregia munera uterque tulit ['Here king Egbert remains with king Kenulph, either of the two bestowed upon us outstanding gifts'].'

The third chest contained part of the mingled remains of persons of very different stations and characters; the other part of them having been deposited in the corresponding chest on the other side. These were the bones of Canute, the great and good Danish king, of his queen Emma, the fair maid of Normandy, and the special friend of this cathedral; of the tyrannical Rufus; of the good bishop Alwyn; and of the simoniacal prelates Wina and Stigand. It appears that these remains, by some means or other, had got so intermixed from the time of De Blois, that it was impossible to distinguish to whom they had severally belonged. This circumstance alone can account for the manner of their disposal by bishop Fox in these chests; as likewise for the equal honour which is thereby paid to characters of very unequal merits. These chests having been, in part, violated by the rebels in the great civil war, and many of the bones which they contained having been taken out of them and scattered about the church; such of them as were recovered, at the Restoration, were laid in the two chests last mentioned. The inscription on the chest before us, on one side, is as follows: — 'In hac et altera e regione cista reliquiae sunt Canuti et Rufi regum, Emmae Reginae, Winae et Almini episcorum ['In this and the other chest directly opposite are the remains of kings Cnut and Rufus (William II), of Queen Emma, and of bishops Wina and Alwyn']..' On the opposite side is this inscription: 'Hac in cista A. D, 1661, promiscue recondita sunt ossa Principum et Praelatorum sacilega barbarie dispersa, A.D. 1642 ['In this chest, in the year of the lord 1661, the bones of the princes and prelates were indiscriminantly interred having been dispersed with sacrilegous barbarity in the year of the lord 1642'].'

We have said that the fourth chest, being the one on the south side directly opposite to that last mentioned, is similar to it, both as to its contents and inscriptions. 

In the fifth chest, which is the middlemost on the south side, lies the mortal part of Edmund, the eldest son of Alfred, whom his father caused to be crowned king in his own life time. The son, however, dying before the father, and previously even to the latter's resolution of building the new monastery for the burying place of his family, he was interred in a spot, which we shall afterwards point out, in this cathedral; whence his bones were removed to the present shrine. This bears on each of its sides the following title and inscription : 'Edmundus Rex, obit A.D., Quem theca haec retinet Edmundum suscipe Christe. Qui, vivente patre, regia sceptra tulit. ['King Edmund, dies in the year of the lord (1016),  Christ accept Edmund which this chest holds. Who, while his father was living, took the royal sceptre.']'

The sixth chest, being that next to the altar on the south side, preserves the relics of the pious king Edred. the youngest of the sons of Edward the elder; who dying rather suddenly, was, by the directions of his friend St. Dunstan, buried in this cathedral, to which he had been a great benefactor. The title and epitaph, supplying the abbreviations, is the same on each side of the chest: 'Edredus Rex, obit A.D. 955. Hoc pius in tumulo rex Edredus requiescit. Qui has Britonum terras rexerat egregiae ['King Edred, dies the year of the lord 955. In this tomb the pious King Edred rests. Who oustandingly ruled these lands of Britain.'].'