[1 December 1413] 

To John Wyddemer, joiner, of London. In money paid to his own hands, as well for the wages and expenses of himself and his men, riding with him to Langley, to provide a bier, and other stuffs there ordered for the carriage of the body of Richard, late King of England, from thence to the abbey of the Blessed Peter, Westminster, there to be newly buried; in part payment of 4l. By writ of privy seal amongst the mandates of this term, — 21. 

[Other payments are entered on this Roll, relating to the removal and burial of the said late King Richard II.] 

To Giles Thorneton, servant of the chandry of the King’s household. In money paid to his own hands at different times, viz., at one time, 24l. 4s. 6d.; at another time, 18l.; at another time, 1l. 6s. 8d.; as well for furnishing 120 torches, newly provided, to burn by the way, around the body of Richard, late King of England, brought from Langley to Westminster, as for the carriage of the said torches to Langley aforesaid and to Saint Albans, 
43l. 11s. 2d. 

[Another payment, of 22l., to the brethren of Langley, is entered on this Roll on the 22nd February, upon the removal of King Richard’s body from Langley to Westminster Abbey.] 

To William Twyford, valet to Lord Thomas, Lari of Arundell, Treasurer of England, sent with a letter from the said Treasurer, directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to borrow from the said Archbishop and Prior of Christ Church, Canterbury, the banners which were provided for the anniversary of the Lord Henry, father of the present Lord the King, held at Canterbury, to be placed upon the hearse ordered at Westminster for the anniversary of the Lord Richard, late King of England, there recently entombed. In money paid to his own hands for his expenses in going, tallying, and returning, — 1l. 6s. 8d. 

[...]

[1413/14]

20th February. — To John Wyddemer, joiner, of London. In money paid to his own hands in discharge of 4s., which the Lord the King commanded to be paid him for making and providing a “horsbere,” a coffin [cista], and other necessary things for the carriage of the body of Richard, late King of England, from Langley to Westminster, there to be newly buried. By writ of privy seal, &c., — 21. 