Read February 18, 1869. 

A TOMB, or more strictly speaking a stone coffin with a coped top, which for some centuries past has been described as the tomb of King William Rufus, in Winchester Cathedral, was opened, and its contents ascertained, by direction of the Vice-Dean (the Ven. Archdeacon Jacob) on August 27th 1868. Subsequently to the examination it then underwent, its position within the building was changed on the 15th September following. No previous notice of the transaction having been given, except to a few persons residing in the town of Winchester, I have to regret that it was not in my power to be present either at the opening or the removal. As an interest of no ordinary kind attaches to this monument, I have considered the matter to be of sufficient consequence to collect together a summary of the particulars. The tomb has long been reputed to be the resting-place of the first of the great line of English sovereigns of the present dynasty buried in England; but besides this, the fatality which caused his death, the mystery in which it was shrouded, the superstitious hatred of the man, which believed the wrath of Heaven to have followed him in the Cathedral where he lay, and to have hurled over his grave the ruins of the central tower, all contribute to invest with peculiar associations this venerable memorial; to which I have now to add another point of interest, namely, that an archaeological question arises for solution as to the actual identity of the tomb so recently opened, and the remains it contained, with the tomb and the remains of the Red King. I shall first describe the tomb itself, and the position it occupied up to September last, and will then give some particulars of the opening and removal. The stone coffin is an oolitic block, which measures 7 ft. 5 in. in length, by 3 ft. 2½ in. in breadth at the head, and 2 ft. 4 in. at the foot. The exact height to which its exposed part rose above the pavement, as it stood last August, is now difficult to ascertain, but it was about 1 ft. 5 in. Below the pavement a portion was buried, hiding under the floor a chamfered plinth which had been worked all round it; and, to all appearance, the coffin had been thus let in to the ground in order to conceal the fact that this plinth was much defaced from having been chopped or broken away. Upon the oolitic stone rests a slab of Purbeck, coped in the form accurately described by Milner as the dos d'ane, or " ass's-back." This Purbeck slab has been polished, and rises along the ridge of its centre to a thickness of about 11 in. over the coffin. For reasons which will appear, it must be noticed, that this coped top is of very considerable solidity, and has been wrought to its present shape with much labour. It is one solid slab, but is carved so as to exhibit to the eye two members, one resting on the other; the upper of these resembles a coped lid or cover in shape, and has a slight flat fillet in relief bordering all its edges. There is no cross, and no trace of any inscription.  

The position of this tomb, up to September last, was in the centre line of the choir, close to the foot of the steps which ascend directly to the Holy Table. It stood at a distance of about 15 feet westward of the lowest step, the foot of the coffin being toward the east. On Thursday, August 27th, 1868, in presence of the Vice-Dean, Dr. Richards, the Senior Surgeon of the County Hospital, with three other medical men, Mr. Colson, Architect of the Cathedral, Mr. Moody, Curator of the local Museum, and the Town Clerk, this interesting tomb was opened by the removal of the top. 

The interior measured 6 ft. 8 in. in length, was about 20 to 22 in. in depth, and was shaped to receive the head. The coffin was found to contain human bones. These, however, were not in the state in which they had been originally deposited. They had undergone extreme displacement, a fact rendered evident by many proofs, but more particularly by the two heel-bones being discovered about the middle of the coffin. All the bones were removed carefully from the dust in which they were embedded, and were laid out, in their proper relation to each other, upon the pavement. The skeleton of a male, about 5 ft. 8 in. to 5 ft. 10 in. in height, but not quite complete, was thus obtained. The following list of the remains is summarized from letters addressed by the surgeons present to the local newspapers: 

The skull much broken, many fragments but 1in. to 1½ in. in diameter, the two temporal bones, and the right orbit, nearly entire, the lower jaw broken into two unequal pieces, but, though incomplete, very massive; portions of sixteen vertebrae, only the two upper being tolerably perfect; parts of six ribs only; the pelvis-bones very imperfect; part of a collar-bone, the blade-bones, the upper and forearm, three wrist-bones, and some finger-bones. Of the lower extremities, the thigh-bones were present, but broken, the necks being separated from the shafts, and the knobs and corners injured as if knocked against hard substances; a knee-pan; parts of the small bones of both legs; the entire of one and portion of the other of the large bones; (one of the surgeons observed that the piece left of the right tibia was very much heavier than the whole of the left, which was very perfect,) the bones of the feet almost complete, and nine teeth remarkably sound and good. 

It was considered by the surgeons who assisted at the opening that the violence done to these remains had taken place long after they were committed to the tomb. The smaller bones of the skeleton, such as those of the hand or of the foot, were scattered apart from each other, and were not found lying close together; they must therefore have suffered disturbance long after the flesh had left them. It appeared equally likely that the disturbance occurred at a date remote from the present time, as they were now in a state of advanced decay, and would not have endured any violence without becoming entirely broken. 

Although the condition in which these remains were discovered shows not only that violence was done them, but that they were replaced without order, yet the surgeons present have expressed their conviction that these bones are portions of one skeleton. The joints which were capable of being fitted together matched as one elbow, the bones of the feet, and the first two vertebrae; and moreover certain of the bones are of the same size, in pairs, and rights and lefts. 

The coffin was entirely emptied of its contents, which were examined with great care. It contained, besides these relics of humanity, a quantity of dust singularly heavy in the hand, the weight of which was attributed to the presence throughout it of minute fragments of lead, described as being "bent, twisted, crystalline, and brittle." Dispersed through the dust were also particles of clothing, of various textures, of which a more detailed account follows; there was also found a small carved ivory head, remarkably similar to those which occur in Norman Avork, the purpose of which it is hard to divine; it has a socket-hole scooped in it at the end, and places for a rivet to pass through it, so as to fasten it. It is beautifully executed, and is of a greenish hue, as if stained by contact with bronze; it possibly might have formed the handle or knob of a very small knife worn in a sheath. A single small turquoise stone of oval shape, parted from the setting, was also found; and lastly, the fragments of a weapon, perhaps a boar-spear. These fragments consisted of an iron spear or javelin head, originally about 9 inches in length, but when found, in two separate pieces, much corroded; one, the point blunted, and the other, the socket, with the tapered end of the shaft still in it; also, the remains of the shaft itself, to the length of about 3 ft. 6 in., chopped into small bits, 2 to 3 inches long each. Some of these were chopped clean, but most were half cut and half broken; the fracture showed an oval section about 1 1/2 in. in the longer and 1 in. in the shorter diameter, and the shaft had been tapered toward the head. 

Such is a summary of the contents of this most interesting tomb. I am indebted to the kindness of the Dean of Winchester (who was absent from the deanery at the time this examination took place, and who was not cognizant of it), and also to the courtesy of the Vice-Dean, for permission to exhibit some of these articles on this occasion. I am also indebted to Dr. Richards, one of the medical gentlemen who was present, for the following analysis of the fragments of clothing now laid before you: 

1. Cloth, red-brown hue. 
2. Tine muslin, striped. 
3. Hather coarser muslin without stripe.
4. Fine closely-woven muslin of firmer texture than the other specimens. 
5. Twilled material, something like serge in pattern, with fine threads.    
6. Twill with coarser fibre, and of much thicker make. 
7. Closely-woven material like linen, with coarser threads running across at regular intervals. 
8. Thick firm cloth, resembling a stocking in make, covered with particles of mineral of a whitish glittering appearance. 
9. A ribbed braid of twisted threads. 
10. Seven different patterns of gold braid.

I have in the next place to describe to you very briefly the replacing of the body and the removal of the tomb to its present site. I shall do this in the words of a short report drawn up by Mr. Colson, architect of the Cathedral. Mr. Colson, after briefly stating the particulars already before you, goes on to say as follows: 

"The bones and remains were reverently returned to the tomb, and the lid cemented down; and on the 15th September, 1868, the tomb was carefully removed to the presbytery, and placed between the chantries of Bishop Waynflete and Cardinal Beaufort, being 108 feet eastward of the site it occupied on the 27th August, 1868. The tomb had doubtless been removed before, as it was found that the plinth had been hacked away and buried beneath the pavement line, and the mortar underneath was comparatively modern." 

Before I now pass away from the particulars of the opening of this tomb, it is proper to mention that two or three pieces of mortar lay in the tomb with morsels of cloth and bone embedded, attributed to the last date when the Purbeck slab had been replaced over the remains. There were also found inside it some pieces of flat cork, a few nutshells, half a dozen iron nails with heads, some fragments of iron, some twigs with bark upon them, and some small pieces of trimmed wood the size of a pencil. In the bottom of the coffin were certain holes, whether meant to permit the exudation of moisture or to facilitate the removal of the stone was not clear, but a burrow directly beneath the site indicated that the nutshells, the twigs, and perhaps the pieces of cork, were in all probability to be referred to the presence of mice. The weapon, such as it was, was replaced with the remains when the top was cemented down; and I regret to add that no drawing has been preserved either of this, or of the appearance presented by the tomb itself upon being opened. 

It is quite impossible to part with this venerable tomb without some remarks as to its identification. The earliest authority for this stone coffin, standing where it did above the pavement of Winchester Cathedral up to September last, being styled the tomb of King William Rufus, will be found to be a manuscript in the handwriting of Henry Earl of Clarendon, bearing this title: "Some account of the Tombs and Monuments in the Cathedral Church of Winchester, finished this 17th day of February, 1683," and signed by that nobleman. This manuscript was the original list of these memorials which Gale thirty-two years after adopted and added to, as he states in his preface, which bears date 1715, "to which (MS.) there is now added a continuation of the inscriptions in the Church to a this time." There is evidence, therefore, to show that as far back as 1683 this tomb was undoubtedly accepted, and apparently without any question, as the actual stone coffin which had held the remains of the King. But it was then fully believed to be quite empty, and to contain no human relics. Gale's statement, taken, as it would appear, from the manuscript of Lord Clarendon, is in these words, speaking of the choir, "In the area, at the ascent to the altar, is a raised monument of greyish marble, in which lay interred William Rufus, before it was broken open and rifled in the late rebellion." He implies that William Rufus was not lying there when he wrote. He did not know that a body had been replaced within this coffin. 

This violation of the tombs at Winchester is stated, in the inscription placed in 1661 upon one of the mortuary chests presently to be noticed, to have been committed in 1642; which date was but forty-one years before Clarendon's list was made. It is, therefore, within reasonable probability that, whatever other errors that list may have contained, Gale is at least not wrong in the description of what was found by those who had rifled this tomb. "In the tomb of William Rufus," says he, "which was broke open by the rebels in the time of the civil wars, was found the dust of that king, some relics of cloth of gold, a large gold ring, and a small silver chalice." However we are to reconcile the matter, these articles were believed by Gale and by Gale's informants to have been inclosed in the very tomb we are now discussing: and, assuming that the attribution of the tomb rested on some good authority, we find ourselves obliged to be ready with some explanation of the extraordinary fact, that a silver chalice, which was the peculiar mark of a priest's interment, was laid within the coffin of a king notorious even to his latest word ("trahe, diabole" - shoot away, devil) for his contempt of sacred things, and who is especially stigmatized by the chroniclers nearest his own date as having died, after a life of crime, by an instantaneous death, without the opportunity of being shriven, and without the viaticum and who left behind him the implicit popular belief that he was hurried untimely by an evil spirit (in the words of Matthew Paris), "ad judicium suum ['to his own judgement']." 

If we accept the finding of the silver chalice along with the body that reposed in this coffin when the rebels broke it open (which they unquestionably did), we must hesitate before we can reconcile ourselves to the belief that it was the Red King. King John, as we know, was buried in a monk's cowl, but that was a sort of fashion at his time; whereas there is no other instance that I am aware of, of a layman of vile character, and who died without the sacraments of the Church, being coffined with a vessel which has ever been held peculiarly sacred, and which, when found buried with the dead, is the symbol of the priesthood. 

But leaving for the present the stone coffin and its Purbeck lid, Lord Clarendon and Gale equally appear to have overlooked the fact (for they were not really unaware of it) that the body of Rufus had been removed out of the tomb in which he was originally laid (whether this or another) many years before the civil war broke out. There are two very trustworthy witnesses to this circumstance; the one is Stowe, who wrote at a time (1592) within the recent memory of the fact itself, and the other is the inscription upon the mortuary chest into which the bones of Rufus were translated (1525), and which inscription was repeated a second time (1661). 

First, the evidence of Stowe. It is observable that, in his " Annales," he gives almost a literal version of the account of Rufus's death as delivered by the Latin chroniclers, and then subjoins a description of the tomb in which the body once lay, as it would seem from personal observation: 

"King William, on the morrowe after Lammas Day, hunting in the New Forest of Hampshire, in a place called Chorengham, where since a chappell was builded, Sir Walter Tyrell shooting at a Deere, unawares hit the King in the breast, that he fell down starke dead, and never spake worde He dyed in the yeere of Christ 1100, & in the 13. yeere of his raygne, on the second day of August, when he had raygned 12 yeeres, 11 moneths, lacking eight days, & was buried at Winchester, in the Cathedrall Church or Monastery of Saynt Swithen, under a playne flat marble stone, before the lecterne in the queere, but long since his bones were translated in a coffer and layd with King Cnute's bones." 

This is an extract from the quarto edition of Stowe's Annales, printed in London in 1592; and the translation of the bones of Rufus, to be laid beside those of Canute, had taken place about sixty-seven years before, that is to say, about the year 1525. If the inscription upon the mortuary chest stood quite alone it might be supposed to have been an error which perchance might have crept in at a late date, in reproducing some older writing upon it; but, corroborated by this statement of Stowe, it is impossible to disregard it. 

Next the evidence of the mortuary chest. There are six of these chests; they stand three on each side of the upper portion of the choir, upon the lateral screens within which Bishop Fox inclosed this part of the church. Those at the end furthest from the Holy Table on both sides suffered more in the rebellion than the others, and on examination we observe that the inscriptions upon these are not the originals. Upon the third chest on the south side was originally inscribed (1525), according to Gale, "Hic jacent ossa Cnutonis et Willelmi Rufi ['Here lie the bones of Cnut and William Rufus']" The present version is as follows: "In hac et altera e regione cista, reliquiae sunt ossium Canuti et Rufi Regum, Emmae Reginae, Winae et Alwini episcoporum ['In this and the other chest directly opposite are the remains of kings Cnut and Rufus (William II), of Queen Emma, and of bishops Wina and Alwyn'].." The corresponding chest referred to shows that this altered form of title was placed there in 1661. It bears the inscription, "In hac cista A.D. 1661, promiscue recondita sunt ossa Principum et Praelatorum, sacrilega barbarie dispersa, A.D. 1642. ['In this chest, in the year of the lord 1661, the bones of the princes and prelates were indiscriminantly interred having been dispersed with sacrilegous barbarity in the year of the lord 1642']" I quote this date (1661) to prove that it was then the belief that in replacing certain remains of the dead, disturbed sacrilegiously twenty years before, so far as they then identified any portion of them to be the body of William Rufus, they put them back within this particular chest to which they had been translated in 1525, and did not then transpose them to any other sepulchre, nor to the tomb now lately opened. It really cannot, therefore, with any fairness be denied that the repeating of the same attribution to Rufus for the second time in 1661 upon this chest, which has never since been disturbed, and the fact that it was repeated immediately after his remains were supposed to be recovered from their violation, afford a strong presumption that they did not lie in August 1868 in a stone coffin upon the floor of the same choir.

But in reality the question turns upon the fact, not of the rebels having dispersed the remains, but upon the truth or falsehood of the first inscription on this chest, placed there by Bishop Fox. The screens erected by Fox upon which he put these mortuary chests are dated, as is well known; they not only have ciphers and badges sculptured on them, but the date 1525 is carved upon that which stands on the north side. I am not aware that any doubt has ever been cast upon the veracity of the inscriptions he ordered to be placed upon these receptacles of the mighty dead, nor had he any reason whatever to wish to mislead. Unless we are prepared to believe that this great prelate and noble benefactor of the Cathedral, the founder of Corpus Christi College at Oxford, was guilty of a purposeless and deliberate deceit, the remains of King Rufus ceased to repose in a tomb in 1525; and though there is proof enough that they were not permitted to rest where Bishop Fox placed them, there is not a shadow of evidence that they were at any time restored to a tomb. For anything that can be traced to the contrary, until Fox moved them they had been left untouched where they were laid at the first, that is to say, in the very centre of the choir, and beneath the middle of the tower. The words of William of Malmesbury imply also that the body was not laid in a tomb above ground, but was deposited in the earth; and I may add that Stowe's description applies far better to such a mode of interment than to an elevated coffin placed above the pavement. William of Malmesbury says, "Infra ambitum turris (cadaver) terrae traditum ['Below the tower passage the body was given to the earth']." Stowe's words are, that he was buried "under a plain flat marble stone." 

Milner's authority is so deservedly great as to Winchester Cathedral that it is but right to say he accepts this tomb from Gale, as Gale had done from Lord Clarendon. He also supposed it to be empty. 

It will now be quite evident that we have two entirely distinct questions: one as to the identification of the tomb; and the other as to that of the remains.  As to the coffin, it was not on its original site in August 1868. This is more certain from the mortar rubbish on which it stood, than from its being partially sunk, for the choir-floor might have risen round it by one pavement being laid over another. The oolitic block which forms the coffin was itself intended originally to stand above ground, as the chamfered plinth round its base distinctly proves. The coped slab of Purbeck above it points to the same intention; in fact, as I have already stated, the coped slab is worked in two members, one appearing as if it rested on the other, and the upper represents a lid or cover, so that under no circumstances could it have been buried in the middle of the choir so as to be laid level with the floor. Taking these points with us, if we are to assume its identity with the coffin of Rufus, we are bound to follow it back from where it was last year, and trace it into the past till we can replace it under the centre of the tower. Altered in position at some previous time it certainly had been, but not between 1868 and 1683, and in 1683 it carried so great authority in its favour, that its authenticity does not seem to have been questioned. Going still backward we must conclude that no change in the position of this coffin occurred between 1683 and the Rebellion; therefore, what we arrive at as historical fact is this, that it emerges from the deluge of the Great Rebellion as a Royal tomb, robbed of its King. At this point we confront a difficulty. It had been then violated - its contents were remembered - the dead body, the ring, the chalice, the "relics of cloth of gold." It ought to have been empty. Who was the illustrious stranger occupying so remarkable a position in another man's coffin? We carry the research further back. It was occupied in 1642. Are we to conclude that it was empty in 1525? If Rufus's, it certainly was so. Bishop Fox had then removed the remains of Rufus to the chest upon the screen. If this stood there as an empty tomb under the tower in 1525, did he remove this tomb, when emptied, to where it lately stood? Fox made improvements in the choir, and carried his alterations over many years. It is certainly possible that this tomb, if standing above the pavement in the centre of the choir, might have been inconvenient, and if emptied of its remains, might have been removed; but in our anxiety to vindicate its authenticity we are at least bound to ask whether Fox was likely, after having translated the body of the Red King to the screen, to have brought the empty stone after the body which once filled it, and to have laid this cenotaph before the high altar of his Cathedral, in the most honourable place of all, in the very centre of his own improvements in the choir, merely in memory of a wicked king, and a notorious oppressor of the Church; whilst the dust of confessors and saintly benefactors slept around unhonoured by any such special mark of distinction. I feel that with the utmost wish to claim this as a royal tomb for the Cathedral Church of the diocese to which I belong, it is more honest to acknowledge that we have here lost our clue, and that unless some other evidence should happily come to light we have no certainty to allege. No one could in my opinion describe a body entombed within this coffin in the words Stowe has used, which words, be it remembered, were written in the interval between Fox and the Rebellion, that such remains were buried "under a plain flat marble stone." Failing other light than at this point, let us look for that which cannot mislead if rightly interpreted; let us examine the style and character of the tomb itself. To what age shall we refer these? Whether tenanted by Rufus or by another, is this tomb Norman or is it earlier? Upon this point I can but venture an opinion with great humility; my opinion however certainly is that the general style and character of the monument may point to an age even earlier than that of the second Norman king. 

After having ventured to say so much about the stone coffin, there can be but little which remains as regards the identification of the body. Yet there are arguments which might weigh with some, the weapon found with the dust may have been, and indeed perhaps was, a hunting spear, so far there might be a possibility that Rufus was buried with the same weapon he held in his hand when the fatal arrow entered his heart; the ivory ornament is of very early date, not later than the Norman Dynasty, and it indicates that the remains in the tomb were of remote antiquity. The condition of the bones, in my judgment, points to the same conclusion, though not with equal certainty. But, on the other hand, if this be Rufus the King, how and when did he return to his original resting-place? And there is the evidence of one witness which cannot be omitted at this point, that, namely, of Henry Howard, Esq., of Corby Castle, who, on July 7, 1797, assisted by Mr. Hastings, a surgeon, and accompanied by several gentlemen, examined all the mortuary chests. Every one of them contained human remains, not one was empty; and, although in the cases of some, and particularly of the two we are now interested in, the bones did not exactly tally with the inscriptions, as there were no skulls in either, yet he found exactly the right number of skulls altogether when the contents of all six chests were examined, there being in all twelve skulls, so as to complete the lists written upon the outside. Now, we know all these chests to have been disturbed in the Rebellion, and, therefore, such evidence in 1797 is highly important, because the body of Rufus, if replaced after 1666 in his original tomb, must have been absent from the chest. 

The truth is that the finding of any remains at all in this tomb is the real difficulty. Every one, whilst it was supposed to be empty, was content to regard it as once having been the resting-place of Rufus. But the presence of another there opens a new field. There is, I would submit, reason to conjecture that its present occupant filled it from the first, though rudely disturbed at the Rebellion. If it be so, he was probably an older inhabitant than Rufus, and may have had a place in the cathedral that preceded Walkelyn's. The evidences of an internal kind are too slight to raise argument upon them; I am permitted, however, to refer for comparison to a portion of gold edging exhibited to-night through the courtesy of Mr. Franks, by J. Henderson, Esq., E.S.A., which is singularly like that contained in this tomb, and the age of which carries us to the Saxon period. I may also venture to throw out a hint that the curious ivory ornament, whatever be the date of its workmanship, has assuredly lain for centuries in contact with bronze, it has become saturated with its colour. Such discolouration of ivory and bone we meet with occasionally in the case of Roman ornaments, as the hafts and chapes of swords and sheaths, and it requires ages to saturate such material; the use of a bronze implement, indeed, for any purpose would be an indication of extreme antiquity. I have not dwelt upon the ring, because, whilst Milner after Gale alleges such a ring to have been taken out of this tomb by the rebels, it is open to uncertainty whether this be actually the one, and if it be, it assuredly was in company with the chalice, and so makes against Rufus, and in favour of a more saintly occupant. 

It remains now only to say what I consider to be justly due, namely, that whilst my own prejudices as an archaeologist and an ecclesiastic would have disposed me to resist, in any examination to which it might have been subjected, any change of position for this venerable tomb, yet the most careful and scrupulous reverence for the dead was shown by the authorities at the Cathedral. It must be remembered, too, that they have ample precedent in this our most ancient and time-honoured Church for such translations of the departed. From the days when St. Ethelwold inaugurated the custom by transferring the remains of Pirinus the Bishop from the north side of the high altar of Winchester to a shrine of silver and gold behind that sacred spot, almost every human body that reposed at the eastern end as conspicuous for sanctity or rank has been moved to some place different to that where it at first rested. Not to mention the extensive removal of bodies effected by Fox, Henry de Blois, one of the most memorable of all the great men who occupied this ancient see, set the chief example to the present vice-dean in his recent act, and was apparently placed in circumstances not entirely dissimilar. He "translated," the bodies of the Kings of the West-Saxons, and of their saints; and, says John of Exeter, "on account of the ignorance as to which were kings and which were bishops, and because no titles or inscriptions were upon their monuments, the aforesaid Henry laid in leaden coffins kings with bishops and bishops with kings, mixed together." In one particular the present vice-dean has done better than his great exemplar Henry, he has reverently returned to their own coffin the remains he found, and has replaced them there in more decent and honourable sort than that in which he discovered them.     

By the REV . JAMES GERALD JOYCE, B.A., F.S.A., Rector of Stratfieldsaye, and Local Secretary for Hampshire. 