The visit of the Wiltshire Archeological Society to Shaftesbury during the past summer, has been the means of bringing once more to light, after an interment of more than three centuries, some portion of its foundations, which are of considerable interest, as proving not only the date of the eastern part of the Abbey Church, but giving also a fair idea of its proportions when entire. The discovery will be best understood by referring to the accompanying ground plan. In July, 1861, with the kind permission of the Marquis of Westminster, the present owner of the site, Mr. Batten, his Lordship’s Agent, commenced excavations in a garden to the South of the present Church of the Holy Trinity, in which there were evident traces of foundations a few feet beneath the surface. The first pit that was sunk brought into view a wall more than 7 feet in thickness, with a pavement of encaustic tiles on its North side. Near the wall at the point marked (d) on the plan [in the Aisle], was a grave 2 feet 3 inches deep, and covered with 4 slabs of green sandstone, part of the pavement of the Church. Two of the slabs, when fitted together, presented on the under surface a plain incised cross having its four limbs of nearly equal length. The sides of the grave were constructed of regular masonry, plastered over, but there was no stone floor. On removing the rubbish a perfect skeleton of a male was discovered, together with the nails and other traces of the wooden coffin in which it had been enclosed. The skull was in a very perfect state; the right arm was bent, and the closed hand lay over the abdomen, whilst the left was extended and placed close to the side. Over the right shoulder was found the stem of a pewter chalice (very much corroded) together with numerous small fragments of the bowl and foot. Two circular bronze buckles, each 2 inches in diameter, lay, one immediately below the pelvis, and the other underneath the left hand, the latter having attached to it a small fragment apparently of leather, but wholly decomposed. There were no traces of vestments, but the chalice proves the remains to have been those of an ecelesiastic, most likely, some priest connected with the service of the Abbey Church. The buckles may have been the fastenings of a leathern girdle worn round the waist above the albe or under vestment. 

Since this first discovery, the excavations have been continued, and the foundations of about 60 feet of the eastern portion of the Abbey Church have been exposed, being probably, those of the Presbytery or Sanctuary to the East of the choir. It seems to have terminated in a semicircular apse, a form by no means unusual in large churches of early Norman date. In this instance it is likely that the gradual increase in the importance of the Abbey, and the popularity which it had acquired by the translation thither of the body of St. Edward the Martyr, in 982, demanded a larger Church than the one which had been erected by King Alfred. 

All the walls hitherto discovered are at least 7 feet in thickness, and the width of the Presbytery from the apse westward is 28 feet, a measurement nearly equal to the corresponding portion of the Abbey Church of St. Alban (also erected during the Norman period) and indicating 4 church not less than 350 or 400 feet in length from East to West. The tower (said to have been surmounted by a lofty spire) was in all probability central, as at St. Alban’s, and there is also another point of resemblance between the ancient Norman plan of St. Alban’s as engraved by Messrs. Buckler, and that of Shaftesbury so far as the examination hitherto permits. Each terminated in a semicircular apse, which was divided by a solid wall from the aisle on either side. The floor of the Presbytery is paved throughout with encaustic tiles of various patterns, but very much worn, and rises gradually eastward, by a gentle slope from (A) to (B); at which point is a single step. There were apparently three others at the entrance to the apse (c), and still further eastward were distinct traces of several more on which the Altar anciently stood. In a straight line and at a distance of nearly 40 feet westward from the point A, the ground was opened, and a continuation of the tile paving found at an additional depth of 17 inches, thus showing the height of the pavement of the apse, and the elevation of the Altar above the level of the western portion of the Church, which yet remains to be uncovered. 

The grave (e) formed of large stones, built in the solid wall, was opened May 2nd, 1862. It was found to have been previously rifled, and the sculptured slab or effigy which once covered it had been removed. Among the rubbish within was an ancient iron lock, with a hasp, much corroded, a handle, and some iron straps containing short rivets, apparently the remains of a small box or casket; also one of the metatarsal bones of a human foot. 

The graves (f) and (g) had also been previously rifled, but among the rubbish removed from the former was found a gold hoop ring, of delicate workmanship, set with an unwrought emerald. The remaining grave (h) which lies immediately outside the North wall of the apse was also opened and found to contain a perfect skeleton, but without any accompanying relic.

The aisle (d) on the North side of the main building is nearly 12 feet in width, and from the remaining base of an Altar to the East end, it evidently was used as a Chapel. A narrow passage cut through the solid wall (c) formed a connection between this and the Presbytery, and the stone step at the entrance, deeply worn on either side, plainly indicates the continual use to which it must have been subjected. The floor is paved with encaustic tiles principally heraldic, and apparently of the decorated period (14th century). They are laid in squares, each formed of 4 tiles bearing similar shields of arms, surrounded by a border of narrow tiles of a green colour. The step in front of the Altar seems also to have been paved with small plain tiles of a like description. The accompanying sketch shows the arrangement of the shields of arms, amongst which are those of the family of Clare, Earls of Gloucester, frequently found in large churches both in Wiltshire and the neighbouring counties: also those of Montacute, Earls of Sarum, Vere and others not identified. The projecting masonry (i) bears the semicircular base of a Norman pier, from which perhaps sprung the rib of a groined roof. 

On the South side of the Presbytery was probably a similar aisle as shown by a portion of another tile pavement at the point (e) but this together with the whole of the western portion of the Church, including choir, nave, aisles, and transepts, yet remains to be uncovered. The chamber (f) is of a later date than the parts of the church above described, and appears to have been used as a crypt. It is 24 feet from East to West, and has the remains of a massive groined roof, of early pointed character, springing from corbels projecting from the walls about 4 feet above the level of the floor. The height of the chamber to the crown of the vaulting (now broken in) was nearly 9 feet. The floor exhibits no traces of paving of any kind, and is 6 feet below the level of that in the adjoining aisle of the church, the communication between the two being a narrow stone staircase leading to a small doorway in the West wall of the crypt. In clearing out the rubbish a quantity of human bones were found near the level of the floor, together with some architectural fragments, evidently thrown in at the time of the destruction of the church, immediately after the Dissolution.

In the course of the excavations some remains of stained glass, and a mass of architectural fragments have been discovered. Among the latter may be recognized some mouldings of the Norman period, the Decorated ball flower (14th century), and an abundance of Perpendicular remains (15th century), as crockets, finials, and other enrichments, either from screen-work or canopied tombs many of them bearing distinct traces of colour. A portion of a monumental effigy of Purbeck marble in low relief, was also discovered, exhibiting, above the robes, some traces of the stem of a pastoral staff. 

In concluding these remarks it is scarcely necessary to add that the warmest thanks of the Wiltshire Archaeological Society, are especially due to the Marquis of Westminster, as well as to Mr. Batten, for the opportunity thus far afforded of investigating, by excavations carefully conducted at his Lordship's expense and under his immediate eye, the interesting remains of this celebrated Benedictine Nunnery.