Our present subject, Henry II., the son of the Empress Matilda, and Geoffrey Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou, died at the Castle of Chinon, nigh Fontevraud, October, 1189, in the 57th year of his age, and 35th of his reign. A modern French writer, who states as his authorities MSS. preserved in the ecclesiastical archives, says “the body of the unfortunate monarch, vested in his royal habits, the crown of gold on his head, and the sceptre in his hand, was placed on a bier richly ornamented, and borne in great state to the celebrated Abbey of Foutevraud, which he had chosen as the place of his interment, and there set in the nave of the great church, where he was buried.” This account partly agrees with that given by Matthew Paris, who says, “But on the morrow, until he should be carried to be buried, he was arrayed in the royal investments, having a golden crown on the head, and gloves on the hands, boots wrought with gold on the feet, and spurs, a great ring on the finger, and a sceptre in the hand, and girt with a sword, he lay with his face uncovered.” When we examine the effigy, we cannot fail of remarking that it is already described by these two accounts; the only variation being in the sword, which is not girt, but lies on the bier on the left side, with the belt twisted round it. It therefore appears, that the tomb was literally a representation of the deceased king, as if he still lay in state. Nor can we, without supposing such was the custom, otherwise account for the singular coincidences between the effigy of King John on the lid of his coffin and his body within it, when discovered a few years since. 

The crown on the head of Henry II. has been probably many years broken, as appears from some remains of an injudicious attempt to restore it with plaister of Paris. It is represented without those clumsy additions in the etchings. The right hand, on which was the great ring, is also broken; but still contains a portion of the sceptre, which, if we may judge from its stays on the breast, must have been remarkably short. The character of the face is strongly marked by high cheekbones and projecting lips and chin; the beard is painted, and penciled like a miniature, to represent its being close shaven; the mantle is fastened by a fibula on the right shoulder, its colour has been, like the cushion under the head, of a deep reddish chocolate; the dalmatic is crimson, and appears to have been starred or flowered with gold. The mantle probably was originally ornamented in a similar manner. The boots are green, ornamented with gold, on which are fastened with red leathers the gold spurs. The whole is executed in free stone, and in a style much resembling the seals of the time, but infinitely superior to what we should expect, judging by the effigy of King John, which in comparison with this is a very inferior production. We are told that Henry II. had on his tomb these lines: 

Rex Henricus eram, mihi plurima Regna subegi
Multiplicique modo, Duxque Comesque fui
Cui satis ad votum non essent omnia terrae
Climata, terra modo sufficit octo pedum.
Qui legis haec, pensa discrimina mortis & in me
Humanae speculum conditionis habe
Sufficit hic Tumulus, cui non sufficeret orbis, 
Res brevis ampla mihi, cui fuit ampla brevis. 

['I was King Henry, I subjected to me many kingdroms to me and in many ways, and I was duke and count, for whom every region of the earth was not enough to wish for, only eight feet of earth is enough. Whoso reads this, think deeply on death and know the human condition seen in me. This tomb suffices, for whom the world did no suffice, a small matter is vast for me, for whom the vast was small.'']