In the eleventh year of this Alexander's reign, his sister Matilda, surnamed the Good, queen of England, died on the First of May, and was buried with honour in the church of the Apostle Saint Peter, at Westminster, in London, in the chapel behind the great altar. In the midst thereof, on the top of a tomb testify and cunningly fashioned, with costly workmanship, are enshrined the remains of the holy King Edward; and, round about the tomb, kings are buried in state. On this queen's virtues some one has written these lines: 

"Weal brought no joys to her, no sorrow woe; 
On this She smiled at woe; it was weal she dreaded so. 
Beauty no frailty brought, nor sceptre pride 
Meekness her might, shame did her beauty hide. 
May's opening day, when night enthralled us here, 
Took her away to Days eternal sphere." 

I also, some time ago, read another epitaph of hers, hung upon: that same tomb, and written in letters of gold, thus:

"Here lies Matilda, the good queen of England, meanwhile wife of King Henry I, and daughter of Malcolm, king of Scotland, and his wife, Saint Margaret. She died in the year 1117. A day would not suffice to tell of all her goodness and uprightness of character." 

William says: "Matilda, King Henry's wife, daughter of Malcolm, king of the Scots, was descended from an old and illustrious stock of kings. She was, from a tender age, remarkable for holiness; rivalling her mother in godliness never allowing anything wrong in her manners, as far as she herself was concerned; and, but for the kings bed, of unblemished chastity,and unscathed even by suspicion. Wrapped in hair-cloth under her regal dress, she used, in Lent, to wear out the thresholds of the churches with her bare feet; nor did she shrink from washing the feet of the sick, or touching with her hands their sores dripping with matter, and, finally, lingering over them with long kisses, and laying their table; and her one pleasure was listening to divine service. Amid all this, she was snatched away, to the great loss of her countries people but not to her own. Her body was nobly cared for, entering into its rest at Westminster; while her spirit showed, by no trifling tokens, that it dwells in heaven. She died, willingly leaving the throne after seventeen years and six months." 