The accomplished author, James Grant, says in one of his works: “Now none may say where James III. of Scotland and the Isles, or his queen, Margaret of Oldenburg, are lying, for the noble Abbey of St Mary has been swept from its foundations (a great part of the stones were used by an Earl of Mar to construct the strange ‘wark’ at the head of the Broad Street of Stirling); one remnant alone survives, a lofty tower, and though the country people still pretend to remember the royal grave, and point it out to visitors, not a stone remains to mark the tomb of the murdered monarch, for the place is now a bare greensward.” The author of a Journey through Scotland in 1723 says he saw the grave of King James III. under a hawthorn tree at Cambuskenneth. It had been suggested to the Trustees of Cowan’s Hospital that it would be desirable to ascertain where the body of James III. lay, and his Queen, so as to treat the royal remains with proper respect, and enclose the tombs, also to trace out the extent of the Abbey Church and explore generally among the foundations. The magistrates of Stirling, entering into this design, and the sanction of the Crown having also been secured, on the 2nd May 1864, twelve workmen were placed under the charge of Bailie Ranken, treasurer of the Town Council of Stirling, a gentleman of good taste and ability, who had for years been most usefully employed in superintending public works in and about Stirling. The following gentlemen were on the ground at the Abbey at the beginning of the excavations:— Provost Murie; Bailies Monteath and Yellowlees; Treasurer Ranken; Councillors Davidson and Christie; Rev. Dr Beith; Rev. Paul Maclauchlan; Dr Duncanson, Alloa; Mr Wallace, Alloa; Colonels Nugent, Boldero, and Sir J. E. Alexander; and Mr Rochead, architect. Among those from Edinburgh were Mr Matheson, of H.M. Board of Works; and, as representing the Society of Antiquaries, Mr David Laing, Mr John M. Mitchell, Belgian Consul, and Mr Andrew Kerr. The excavators were divided into two parties, and what is singular, though there was not a stone of the church and the adjacent buildings to be seen when the work commenced, but merely undulations on the surface of the ground, owing to some judicious directions, the men had not dug more than half-an-hour before one of the parties came upon the site of the high altar — a square enclosure of masonry — and the other on the transepts. In the earth, above which had stood the high altar, was found the body of a youth lying across the enclosure, the head in a recess, Beneath this, and longitudinally, lay a fine skeleton of a yellowish colour, probably that of an ecclesiastic. The bones were carefully put aside for re-interment, and I had them photographed by Mr Crowe of Stirling. (These photographs were exhibited to the meeting.) The church and chapter-house, with the base of a central pier to support an arched roof, were now traced out; the scalloped capital of the pier or pillar was found. The bases of some of the piers of the church were in good order, and the clayey soil had so well preserved the foundation stones that they appeared sharply cut as if recently laid. The length of the church, from the high altar inclusive to the western door, was ascertained to be 178 feet, breadth 37 feet.

On the south are the foundations of a long building, near one of the orchards. This may possibly have been the Parliament House. At Cambuskenneth, in 1826, the nobility, barons, and clergy assembled in solemn Parliament along with a great number of persons of inferior rank, and swore fealty to David Bruce as heir apparent to the throne. “This,” says Tytler, “was the first Scottish Parliament, as far as can be ascertained, into which the representatives of cities and burghs were admitted as members.” Here various of the Scottish monarchs granted charters and the Scottish Parliament repeatedly assembled. In the course of the excavations, coins of the Jameses and Charleses were found; three keys — one large enough to have been the key of the west door; knives, razors, pieces of pottery (Dutch, probably) — one piece with a curious dog’s head on it; tobacco pipes (similar to some I had seen at the Bass Rock, supposed to have been used by the soldiers of the guard there); portions of stained glass from the eastern window; broken stone shafts and capitals of pillars of the twelfth century; a brass shoe-buckle; a brass chess-knight (the horse’s head well defined); stone whorls for the distaff; a small glass bottle; a curious iron instrument, 14 inches long, of unknown use, with prongs, though certainly not a fork. (Sketches of these various articles were exhibited.) It will interest the curious in these matters, when all the reliquice are laid out for inspection in a chamber of the belfry tower. At one of the angles of the chapter-house, in which the sedilia or bench tables are well preserved, is the figure of a medieval sword. This is in astrange position, as if the stone on which it is carved had been over the tomb of a warrior in some other part of the grounds, and the slab removed and made use of as a corner-stone of the chapter-house. A fine stone coffin was found near the south transept (might this have been that of Richard II.?), and over it three massive blocks of stone. On lifting these a skull was seen, but at the foot of the stone coffin, showing that the dead had been previously disturbed. There was a large beam of black oak under the stone coffin, and others squared and resting on piles, to prevent the foundations falling in, for at no great depth water is found here, and the clay had well preserved the timber. Some of the logs have been raised and can be turned to good account, as the proceeds of their sale for souvenirs of the ancient edifice may help to enclose the foundations. It is proposed to make chairs for the Provost and Dean of Guild of Stirling of this oak. 

Between the high altar and the thorn tree a slab of coarse blue marble or mountain limestone lay under the soil, it was in a slanting position as if disturbed formerly; one corner of it was broken off, and it was also cracked across. What remained of the slab measured about five feet square and seven inches thick. It had a hewn margin, and was hewn as a panel across its rough face. This was the usual royal tablet stone seen at Dunfermline, Dunblane, &c. On close inspection batholes were seen with lead in them, these had held the monumental brass of which two portions were found, the one with the figure of a flower on it, the other marked with cross lines; the larger portion with the inscription had been torn off and removed.  It was resolved to look for a vault under the slab. It was accordingly raised, and on digging down a few feet a large oak coffin was found, the feet touching the enclosure of the high altar, the head to the west. Inside the coffin was a skeleton, doubtless of King Jamies III. On being exposed to the air most of the bones crumbled to dust, some remained, fragments of the skull and of the lower jaw, two molar teeth, thigh bones, &c. Moist clay surrounded the coffin, which had preserved it so long. The pieces of the coffin which remained showed the grain of the wood—oak, and probably from the neighbouring Torwood. On the left of the male bones were those of a female, also the bones of a child. The three bodies had been disturbed before, perhaps for the sake of any ornaments which had been buried with them, A small coffin ornament of metal was found, in shape like a flower. The bones were carefully placed aside for re-interment, and the tombs are to be enclosed. In clearing out the foundations of the church great quantities of bones were discovered, also on the south side of it, and about the chapterhouse. I took with me one day Colonel Monro, Bombay Army, and Dr Alex. Paterson of the Bridge of Allan, to examine some of these remains previous to their being again committed to the earth. The remarks of the latter gentleman are as follows :— “I examined many of the relics found during the recent excavations. A number of human skeletons were discovered, most of them in a state of great decay. The bones in the meantime had been carefully put into boxes and deposited in the tower of the Abbey. By far the most interesting set of bones are those of King James III. Unfortunately the only bone of the king found entire is the lower jaw, which is remarkable on account of its large size, only two molar teeth remain in the jaw. The frontal part of the cranium is well preserved, and from the appearance of this part of the skull it shows that the king must have had a very low receding forehead.” The only other circumstance worthy of notice in regard to the bones of the king is, that they differed in colour from all the other bones found, those of the king being of a dark brown tawny colour; this colour may have been produced by the decay of the oak coffin. A number of entire skulls were found; a curious fact connected with them is that in all of them the cranial cavity is filled with clay in a solid condition; the clay must have got into the skulls through the action of the water.” I have had casts taken of the cranium and lower jaw of the king by Mr Barclay, the sculptor in Stirling; and also had an oaken chest made to contain the royal remains, that they might be re-interred with every respect. 

Footnote: Mr David Laing mentioned to me that the late Mr Adam G. Ellis, W.S., told him an old inhabitant at the Abbey had pointed out, many years ago, the mound near such a tree, under which the King was buried, Mr Ellis, who imagined he might still recognise the spot, had long expressed a desire that the place should be explored; but at this time he was altogether unable to accompany the deputation.