[784]
When Cynewulf, king of Wessex, was taking measures for expelling Cynehard, who, being king Sigebert’s brother, was the Etheling, it chanced that he came with only a few attendants to a vill called in English Morton, to visit some woman. The etheling, learning this, instantly collected a band of his retainers, and hastened to the spot with great glee. On his arrival, finding all the world asleep, he had the chamber in which the king lay closely beset on all sides by his followers. The king being alarmed, leapt from the bed, and seizing his arms, opened the chamber-door, and fought stoutly in resistance to his assailants. At length, getting sight of the etheling, he rushed forth to attack him, and gave him a severe wound. Seeing this, the whole band of the etheling’s soldiers fell on the king, and wounded and slew him. The woman, uttering cries of terror and grief, fills the chamber with her lamentations. The few troops who were in attendance on the king run to the spot, and find their master, whom they had just before left alive, lying dead. At this they are roused to such a pitch of fury, that drawing their swords they make a desperate rush on his murderers. The etheling endeavours to pacify them, promising to each a large sum of money, besides sparing their lives, if they will withdraw; they, however, reject his offers, and continue the combat till they all perish, except one British hostage, who was desperately wounded. When morning came, and the news of the king’s death got abroad, his ealdorman Osric, who was much attached to him, and Wiferth, his most faithful thane, hastened to the spot with all the force the king had left behind the day before; but they find all the gates barred. While they are trying to burst them open, the etheling boldly advances to them, promising them that he will cheerfully heap on them gold, silver, honours, whatever they severally coveted, if they will only raise him to the royal throne: he suggests also, that there are many of their relations on his side, who are ready to follow him to the death, rather than be induced to abandon him on any pretence. The royal troops reject his offers, and earnestly entreat their kinsmen to desert their lord and depart home in safety with all possible despatch. But the etheling’s party replied :— “What you offer us, we proposed to your comrades who fell with the king; but as they would not attend to our summons, neither will we obey yours on the present occasion.” On receiving this answer, the royal troops advance, force open the doors, level the barricades, and put the etheling and all his followers, in number eighty-four, to the sword, except only his little son who was severely wounded. The king’s corpse was conveyed to Winchester for interment; the etheling’s was buried in the monastery at Axminster.