She [Eleanor of Castile] bore him four sons and nine daughters, and died in attending him on an expedition towards Scotland, 27th November, 1290, at the house of Richard Weston, at Herdby, or Harby, in the parish of North Clifton on the Trent, five miles from Lincoln. Her bowels were buried in Lincoln Cathedral, and her body was conveyed for interment to the Abbey Church at Westminster. At every stage where it rested the King ordered a Cross to be placed. Fifteen are enumerated as having been erected in consequence. One at Herdby, whence the procession set out; and in the chapel of which place Edward also founded a chantry for her soul. The others at Lincoln, Newark, Grantham, Leicester, Stamford, Geddington, Northampton, Stony Stratford, Woburn, Dunstable, St. Alban's, Waltham, Cheapside (London), and at the village of Charing, near the Minster where she was to be entombed. Herdby, Leicester, Woburn, and Cheap, are omitted by some authorities. These Crosses were adorned with statues of the Queen. Those at Geddington, Northampton, and Waltham are extant at this day. In gothic niches in the upper part have been female figures, very similar in style to that on her tomb; on the lower, shields charged with arms of England, Castile and Leon, and Ponthieu. Edward caused a monument to be erected to her memory near that of his father in the Confessor's Chapel, in Westminster Abbey, on which is placed her recumbent image of copper; and round the verge of the tomb the following inscription, in uncial letters: 

ICY GYST ALIANOR IADIS REYNE DE ANGLETERRE, FEMME AL RE EDEWERD FIZ LE RE ...
OVNTIF DEL ALME DE LI DEV PVR SA PITE EYT MERCI. AMEN 

['Here lays Eleanor once Queen of England, wife of King Edward son of King [Henry] … [ountif] for the soul from God for his pity and mercy. Amen.']

Sandford informs us that on a tablet of wood, hanging near her monument by an iron chain, were the following verses in Latin: 

Nobilis Hispani jacet hic soror inclita regis, 
Eximii consors Aleanora thori, 
Edwardi primi Wallorum principis uxor, 
Cui pater Henricus tertius Anglus erat; 
Hanc illi uxorem gnato petit; omine princeps 
Legati munus suscipit ipse bono: 

['Here lies the famous sister of the noble Spanish king,
Queen-consort Eleanor, of outstanding lineage,
wife of Edward the first Prince of Wales,
to whom the English Henry the Third was father,
He [Henry] sought her [Eleanor] as wife for his son, the Prince himself well took up the role of ambassador with many others.']

In a tomb bearing her effigy of brass gilt, similar to that in Westminster Abbey, but destroyed in the Civil wars. On it was the following inscription :

HIC • SVNT • SEPVLTA • VICERA • ALIANORE • QVONDAM • REGIME • VXORIS • REGIS • EDVARDI •
FILII • REGIS • HENRICI • CVIVS • ANIME • PROPICIETVR • DEVS • AMEN • PATER • NOSTER •

['Here are buried the entrails of Eleanor once reigning wife of King Edward, son of King Henry, may God our Father look after his soul, Amen.']