After visiting Paris in [1816], and executing a part of his commission at Bayeux, [Charles Stothard] proceeded upon a tour of investigation to Chinon, and discovered in the adjacent abbey of Fontevraud, those most interesting effigies of our early monarchs and their queens, of the race of the Plantagenets; the existence of which, in consequence of the destruction and universal havoc caused by the Revolution, had become matter of doubt. Charles found the abbey converted into a prison; and, in a cellar belonging to it, were then deposited the effigies of Henry II., his queen, Eleanor of Guienne, Richard I., and Isabella of Angoulesme, the queen of John. The chapel where these figures were placed before the Revolution had been destroyed; and, since their removal to the cellar, they were exposed to continual injury from the prisoners, who came twice in every day to draw water at the well. Charles made several beautiful and accurate drawings from these effigies, in both front and profile views; and, by a most careful and minute investigation, succeeded in discovering the painting upon their surface. Of this he made a separate drawing, depicting the figures with their dresses, ornaments, &c. in their original magnificence and gilded splendour. 

Shortly after the above-mentioned discoveries, my husband visited the abbey of L'Espan, near Mans, in search of the tomb and effigy of the famous Berengaria, the beautiful and accomplished queen of Richard I. He found the abbey converted into a barn, and the effigy of the princess in a mutilated state, concealed under a quantity of wheat. In the following year, however, he succeeded in making drawings of this interesting remain; and likewise executed his curious fac-simile drawing from the enamelled tablet of Geoffrey Plantagenet, the father of our Henry II., which he discovered at Le Mans. This tablet he considered the earliest specimen of what is termed a sepulchral brass, and of armorial bearings, depicted decidedly as such. 