But the offence of such a mistake on the part of William is a great deal lessened because what took place at Waltham was well known far and wide. For, in truth, this horrible report had reached the ears of the private domestic canons of the King at Waltham, seeing that nearly everyone was saying that the King [Harold] had fallen at the battle ot Hastings. The clerks, so often mentioned above, not unmindful of the devotion due to their most generous patron, sent a certain woman of a shrewd intelligence, Edith by name, to the district where the battle had been fought, that she might carry away the limbs of their dead lord, to be buried reverently in their church. She seemed [a more suitable person] to make the attempt, insomuch as the weaker and less favoured sex would be considered less an object of suspicion to the cruel officers in authority, and more an object of compassion. But this woman seemed more fitted than all others to carry out this affair, because she could more easily discover amongst the thousands of corpses him she sought, and would handle his remains more tenderly, because she loved him exceedingly, and knew him well, inasmuch as it was clear that she had been frequently present in the secret places of his chamber. But when she reached the ill-omened spot, she heard from many Normans, who were everywhere boasting, that the King of the Angles was ignominiously beaten, with his cross broken in halves, and that he was lying on the battle-field, killed amongst the slain.

But let the reader see what turned out to be a truer account. For others thought that they who had carried off the King half dead, had set about this report, foreseeing that it would be dangerous to them and to him, and would prove their certain destruction, if the enemy should hear that he was alive. We must not therefore wonder at the mistake of the woman who, unable to discern the features of the body—hacked about as it was, covered with blood, already becoming black and decomposed, since she could not find one which she could be certain was the King’s — seized hold of, and carried off with her, another man’s mangled corpse, to satisfy the public estimation. And this was the body which was received in all reverence by the Canons of Waltham, without questioning the truth of the matter, and was handed over for burial in the Church of the Holy Cross.