[1087]
Intelligence of the king's [William's] death was quickly spread, and, far and near, the hearts of those who heard it were filled with joy or grief. In fact, King William's decease was known in Rome and in Calabria to some of the exiles he had disinherited, the same day he died at Rouen, as they afterwards solemnly asserted in Normandy. For the evil spirit was frantic with joy on finding his servants, who were bent on rapine and plunder, set free by the death of their judge. O, worldly pomp, how despicable you are when one considers that you are empty and fleeting! You are justly compared to watery bubbles, since at one moment you are inflated and rise, and vanish the next. Behold this mighty prince, who was lately obsequiously obeyed by more than a hundred thousand men in arms, and at whose nod nations trembled, was now stripped by his own attendants, in a house which was not his own; and left on the bare ground from the hour of primes to that of tierce. 

Meanwhile, the citizens of Rouen having heard the death of their prince, were in the greatest state of alarm; almost all of them lost their reason, as if they had been intoxicated, and were thrown into as much confusion as if the city had been threatened with an assault by a powerful army. Each quitted the place where he received the news, and ran to confer with his wife, or the first friend or acquaintance he met, as to what was to be done. Every one removed, or prepared to remove, his valuables, concealing them with alarm, lest they should be discovered. At length the religious, both clergy and monks, recovering their courage and the use of their senses, formed a procession; and, arrayed in their sacred vestments, with crosses and censers, went in due order to St. Gervase, where they commended the spirit of the departed king to God, according to the holy rites of the Christian faith. Then William, the archbishop, ordered the body to be conveyed to Caen, and interred there in the abbey of St. Stephen the protomartyr, which the king himself had founded. His brother and other relations had already quitted the place, and all his servants had deserted him, as if he had been a barbarian; so that not one of the king's attendants was found to take care of his corpse. However, Herluin, a country knight, was induced by his natural goodness to undertake the charge of the funeral, for the love of God and the honour of his country. He therefore procured at his own expense persons to embalm and carry the body; and, hiring a hearse, he caused it to be carried to the port on the Seine; and, embarking it on board a vessel, conducted it by water and land to Caen. 

Then Gilbert, the lord abbot, with the whole convent of monks, met the hearse in solemn procession, accompanied by a sorrowing multitude of clerks and laymen, offering prayers. But at this moment a sudden calamity filled the minds of all with alarm. For a fire broke out in one of the houses, and, shooting up prodigious volumes of flame, spread through great part of the town of Caen, doing great damage. The crowds, both of clergy and laity, hastened with one accord to extinguish the fire, so that the monks were left alone to finish the service they had begun, and they brought the royal corpse into the abbey church, chanting psalms. 

Afterwards, all the bishops and abbots of Normandy assembled to perform the obsequies of the illustrious duke, who was the father of his country. I will insert in this work a short list of some of the number, for the information of posterity. William, archbishop of Rouen; Odo, bishop of Bayeux; Gilbert, bishop of Evreux; Gilbert Maminot, bishop of Lisieux; Michael, bishop of Avranches; Geoffrey, bishop of Coutances; and Gerard, bishop of Seez. Amongthe abbots were the following : Anselm, of Bec; William deBoos, of Fecamp; Gerbert, of Foutenelles; Guntard, of Jumieges; Mainier, of St. Evroult; Fulk, of Dive; Durand, of Troarn; Robert, of Seez; Osbern, of Beruai; Roger, of St. Michael-in-peril-of-the-sea; the two abbots of Rouen, Nicholas, of St. Ouen, and Walter, of Mont-de-la-Sainte-Trinite; with many more, whom it would be tedious to enumerate. All these assembled at the funeral of the illustrious Baron, and buried him in the sanctuary, between the choir and the altar. 

The mass ended, when the coffin was already lowered into the grave, but the corpse was still on the bier, the great Gilbert, bishop of Evreux, ascended the pulpit, and pronounced a long and eloquent discourse on the distinguished character of the deceased prince. He expatiated on William's having extended by his valour the bounds of the Norman dominion, and raised his people to a pitch of greatness surpassing the times of any of his predecessors; and on his having maintained peace and justice in all his states, wisely chastising thieves and robbers with the scourge of the law, while he firmly defended the clergy and monks, and defenceless people, with his meritorious sword. When he had concluded his discourse he addressed himself to the congregation, who were shedding affectionate tears and attested his assertions, and added this supplication: "As in this present life no man can live without sin, I beseech you, for the love of Christ, that you earnestly intercede with Almighty God on behalf of our deceased prince,and that you kindly forgive him, if in aught he has offended against you." 

Then Ascelin, son of Arthur, came forward from tho crowd, and preferred the following complaint with a loud voice, in the hearing of all: "The land," he said, "on which you stand was the yard belonging to my 'father's house, which that man for whom you pray, when he was yet only duke of Normandy, took forcible possession of, and in the teeth of all justice, by an exercise of tyrannical power, here founded this abbey. I therefore lay claim to this land, and openly demand its restitution, and in God's name I forbid the body of the spoiler being covered with earth which is my property, and buried in my inheritance." The bishops and other great men, on hearing this, and finding from inquiries among his neighbours that he spoke the truth, drew the man aside, and, instead of offering him any violence, appeased his resentment with gentle words and came to terms with him. For the small space in which the grave was made, they paid him on the spot sixty shillings, and promised him a proportionable price for the rest of the land which he claimed. This agreement they soon afterwards fulfilled, for the good of the soul of the master they dearly loved. 

However, when the was lowered into the stone coffin, they were obliged to use some violence in forcing it in, because through the negligence of the masons it been made too short, so that, as the king was very corpulent, the bowels burst, and an intolerable stench affected the by-standers and the rest of the crowd. The smoke of incense and other aromatics ascended in clouds, but failed to purify the tainted atmosphere. The priests therefore hurried the conclusion of the funeral service and retired as soon as possible in great alarm, to their respective abodes.

I have thus carefully investigated, and given a true account of all the manifestations of God’s providence at the duke’s death, not composing a well-feigned tragedy for the lucre of gain, nor a humorous comedy to provoke the laughter of parasites, but a true narrative of the various events for the perusal of studious readers. In the midst of prosperity adverse circumstances were permitted to arise, That the hearts of men might be impressed with the fearful warnings.

‘A king once potent, and warlike, and the terror of the numberless inhabitants of many provinces, lay naked on the floor, deserted by those who owed their birth, and those he had fed and enriched. He needed the money of stranger for the cost of his funeral, and a coffin and were provided, at the expense of an ordinary person, for him, who till then had been in the enjoyment of enormous wealth. He was carried to the church, amidst flaming houses, by trembling crowds, and a spot of freehold land was wanting for the grave of one whose princely sway had extended over so many cities, and towns, and villages. His corpulent stomach, fattened with so many delicacies, shamefully burst, to give a lesson, both to the prudent and the thoughtless, on what is the end of fleshly glory. Beholding the corruption of that foul corpse, men were taught to strive earnestly, by the rules of a salutary temperance, after better things than the delights of the flesh, which is dust, and must return to dust. There is but one lot for rich and poor; both become the prey of death and corruption. Trust not then, O sons of men, in princes who deceive, but in the true and living God, who created all things. Turn over the pages of the Old and New Testament, and take from thence numberless examples which will instruct you what to avoid and what to desire. Expect nothing from iniquity, and covet not the goods of others. “If riches increase, set not your heart upon them.” “All flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of hay. The grass fadeth, and the flower thereof perisheth; but word of the Lord remaineth for ever.”