To William Stevenson, Esq., Norwich.
Rodney Buildings, New Kent Road,
May, 1818.

DEAR SIR,
I send you No. 8. of my work, which I have but just published. You would have had your copies before, had I not been obliged to leave town on an occasion closely connected with my favorite pursuits, the preservation of an interesting subject of Roman antiquity. Having returned, I found your letter, anticipating my intentions. You inquire what I have been about in France. I had imagined you would have heard by my friend Mr. Turner, or I certainly should have given you a few lines before on the subject. You most likely know that the main object of my visit on the other side of the water was to copy the celebrated tapestry at Bayeux, for the Society of Antiquaries; but, not forgetting my own work, I resolved, notwithstanding all the accounts I had heard of monumental devastation in France, to ascertain, beyond a doubt, what had been the fate of those effigies which belonged to the English nation.

Contrary to my expectation, I succeeded, in the summer of 1816, in discovering two English kings, and the same number of queens; and the last year I was equally fortunate in finding another English queen, and a most curious memorial of Geoffrey Plantagenet, the father of our Henry II., and consequently a link in the series of characters belonging to our early English history. I have not entered into any particulars on these subjects, because I should only repeat what you will find in No. 8. I have little doubt but you will think the above the greatest possible acquisitions to my work. I, perhaps, set a higher value on them from the circumstance that, till I brought my drawings to England, the originals were supposed to have been entirely destroyed during the revolution. 

Antiquity in France has received such a blow as it can never recover. The best idea I can give you is to say, that had I gone over the same space of ground in England as I have done in France, I might have filled a folio; whereas in the latter I have not found more than would furnish me with a dozen drawings; and my good fortune in discovering every thing I sought is therefore the more extraordinary.

I have promised almost year after year since I saw you, to pay Mr. Turner a visit at Yarmouth. If nothing comes either in his way or mine, I shall this year accomplish it, when of course I shall not see Norwich spire without coming to shew you I have not forgotten my friend, although circumstances have kept me so long silent. I have not yet etched the Ely bishop Norwold, but when I do you shall certainly be remembered. In No. 8. you will perceive I have made my first step in authorship, and at the same time you will see the manner in which I have so long talked of arranging my letter-press with architectural and other subjects. [...]
With best respects to your family, 
Very truly yours, 
C. A. STOTHARD. 