[1406]
There is good reason for believing that Albany and the Douglases had to do with this imprisonment of the Prince. They did everything to prevent his release. It was the last drop of bitterness in the cup of King Robert. When the sad news was brought him he was at supper in his Castle of Rothesay. "Touched by grief" says the old chronicle, "his bodily strength vanished, his countenance paled, and, borne down by sorrow, he refused all food until at last he breathed forth his spirit to his Creator." He was buried in the Abbey of Paisley, before the great altar, the last of the Stewarts who were laid there. The Abbot received six stones of wax for performing his obsequies.  In his humility, the chronicle we have quoted tells us, the King deemed himself worthy of no such sacred resting-place. One day his Queen Anabella enquired of him wherefore, after the manner of his predecessors on the throne, he should not provide for himself a splendid monument, and fix on a laudatory epitaph to be inscribed upon it. The King, in his sorrow, is said to have thus made reply — "You speak as one of the foolish women, because if you consider well who and what I am; what in nature but a corrupt seed — what in person but food of worms — what in life but the most miserable of men, you would not care to erect any proud monument. Those men who desire the pleasures of high station in this world may have glittering tombs, but I would desire to be buried in the depths of a dunghill, that my spirit might be safe in the day of the Lord. Bury me, therefore, I pray you, in such a dunghill, and write for me this epitaph — 'Here lies the worst king and most miserable man in the universe!' It is, perhaps, as pathetic an utterance on the vanity of earthly greatness as history records. Curiously enough his desire has found almost literal fulfilment. Robert III. is perhaps the only one of the Scottish Kings who has no monument over his grave. The only record of his place of burial is in the pages of the historian. The rank grass of the neglected and ill-kept churchyard waves over his resting-place, and the dust of the humblest mingles with his royal remains. Vanitas vanitatum omnia vanitas ['Vanity of vanities is all vanity']. 