After an eventful reign of fifty-six years, he [Henry III] died at Westminster, Wednesday, 16th November, 1272, and was buried, according to the particular direction of his last will, in the Abbey Church of that place, notwithstanding his having previously appointed for himself a sepulture in the New Temple at London. He commits to his son and successor the finishing of the Church founded by the “blessed Edward” at Westminster, which he had rebuilt on a sumptuous scale, and which remains to this day a proud and splendid monument of our ancient Monarchy and our Christian faith, however the latter, in those remote days, was obscured by superstition. He bequeaths for completing the shrine of St. Edward - five hundred marks of silver, to be furnished from the value of his jewels by his Queen and his executors. He leaves, moreover, certain vestments of his chapel, a silver image of the Virgin, and certain crosses of gold, to St. Edward’s chapel at Westminster. His heart was buried at Fontevraud, where the remains of his grandfather and grandmother, and others of his royal predecessors, reposed. His tomb is on the north side of the shrine of Edward the Confessor, and has been richly ornamented with inlaid work. On the top lies the effigy of the King, composed of copper (see the two Plates of the front and profile). On the head is a crown of a very simple and elegant form. His hands have supported the sceptre and orb, which have been removed. Over the left shoulder is thrown the royal mantle, fastened on the right by a fermail, or clasp. Beneath is the tunic. On the legs arc boots, on which are represented as embroidered in fret-work golden lions passant guardant. The same ornament decorates a square and a lozenge-shaped pillow, which are placed under his head. The style in which this image, is executed is of the finest cast; it is very probably Italian workmanship. The folds of the drapery are beautifully disposed, and the head has much of the simple majesty of the antique or Greek school. Sandford gives this inscription as remaining, in uncial characters, round the tomb of Henry the Third: 

Sub hac tabula (altari olim hujusce sacelli) diu prostrata, igne confracta, requiescunt tandem, varias post vices, hic demum jussu Victoriae Reginae deposita, ossa Catharinae de Valois, Filiae Caroli Sexti, Franciae Regis, Uxoris Henrici Quinti, Matris Henrici Sexti, Aviae Henrici Septimi. Nata MCCCC,  Coronata MCCCCXXXI.  Mortua MCCCCXXXVIII. Under this slab —  which was once of the shrine's altar in this place, it having fallen over and been broken by fire long ago — more recently rest, after various changes and deposited here at last by order of Queen Victoria, the bones of  Catherine of Valois, daughter of Charles the Sixth, King of France; wife of Henry the Fifth, mother of Henry the Sixth, grandmother of Henry the seventh. Born in 1400, crowned in 1431, dead in 1438.]ICI : CIST : HENRI : IADIS . REY : DE : ENGLETERRE : SEYGNVR : DE : IRLAVNDE : DVC DE : AQVITAYNE : LE : FILE : DE : ROY : IOHAN : IADIS : REY : DE : ENGLETERRE: A : KI : DEV : FACE : MERCY : AMEN. ['Here in this coffin, Henry once King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Aquitaine, the son of King John once king of England.]