Richard having received the Sacraments of the Church, died in the fortress above-mentioned [Chalus] on Tuesday 6th April 11, after a reign of nine years and nine months [in 1199]. He directed his heart to be carried to his faithful city of Rouen for interment in the Cathedral; his bowels, as his ignoble parts, to the rebellious Poietevins; and his body to be buried at the feet of his father Henry the Second at Fontevraud. This gave rise to the following Leonine verses, which are quoted by Matthew Paris as having been written for him by some rhymer of the day by way of epitaph, in which the idea that so mighty a ruin was too great for one place, is not destitute of point: 

Pictavus exta ducis sepelit tellusque Chalutis; 
Corpus dat claudi sub marmore Fontis-Ebraldi; 
Neustria, tuque tegis cor inexpugnabile regis; 
Sic loca per trina te sparsit tanta ruina, 
Non fuit hoc funus cui sufficeret locus unus. 

['The Poitevin and earth of Chalus buried the entrails of the leader,
The body closed under the marble of Fontevraud,
Normandy, and you cover the impregnable heart of the king;
Thus so great a fall scattered you through three places,
There was no funeral for which a single place might have sufficed.'']

Over his gilt monument, according to Sandford, was the following inscription probably on a suspended tablet, being a summary of his most celebrated exploits: 

Scribitur hoc tumulo, rex auree, laus tua tota 
Aurea, materia; conveniente nota: 
Laus tua prima fuit Siculi, Cyprus altera, dromo 
Tertia, caravana quarta, suprema Ioppe; 
Suppressi Siculi, Cyprus pessundata, 
dromo Mersus, caravana capta, retenta Ioppe. 

['All of your golden praise is written on this tomb, king of gold,
in material [i.e. gilt], as well as in the gathered record.
Your first praise was in Sicily, the next in Cyprus, the dromond [i.e. the great Muslim ship] your third,
the caravan your fourth, Jaffa your last.
Having suppressed Sicily, having crushed Cyprus
sunk the dromond, captured the caravan and held Jaffa.']

The figure of Richard the First reposes on a bier covered with drapery. He wears a crown, the trefoils of which are filled up with a honeysuckle pattern, which various architectural remains of the same period shew to have been then much in vogue. His royal mantle is painted blue with an ornamental gold border, his dalmatic or supertunic is red, his tunic is white, and under this appears his camise or shirt. The boots are adorned with broad ribband like stripes of gold, which appear to have been intended to express the earlier mode of chaussure sandals. The leather of the spurs are visible. 