[1808]
In the course of last summer, whilst the author was absent in the north of England, certain gentlemen of distinguished talents and learning, officers in the West York regiment of militia, being desirous of investigating the antiquities of this city more attentively and minutely than is usually done by strangers; obtained permission to open certain tombs in the cathedral, and to examine the contents of the mortuary chests round its choir. Having completed these scientific researches, with all the respect that is due to the illustrious dead; one of their number, Henry Howard, Esq. of Corby Castle, was so obliging as to communicate to the author a very perspicuous account of their discoveries; an extract from which, with his permission, relating to the contents of the chests, is here inserted, for the information of the reader. 

"July 7, assisted by Mr. Hastings, surgeon of the North Gloucester militia, we looked into the different chests, said to contain the bones of the Saxon kings. The first chest, inscribed Kingils and Adulphus, contains two skulls and two sets of thigh and leg bones. We measured the skulls and thighs to find out whether there was any difference in the size from that of the present race of men, and found the first skull from the posterior part of the ossatemporis. to measure 5¾ inches, and the second skull 5½ 1/15 inches. Ditto, from the inferior part of the os frontis to the os occipitis, 7½ inches. Second skull ditto. These measurements, and indeed those of the others, prove that there was no superiority of size. From the contents of the chest it does not appear that the bones do not belong to the kings with whose names it is inscribed. 

Second chest, inscribed Egbert and Kenulph. This contains three skulls, one of which is very small. One thigh bone, wanting a fellow, is very stout, and measures 19¼ inches long. But the two leg bones, one of which is rather deformed, and the two hip bones belonging to this body, are in the chest, and answer exactly. There are also two other thigh bones and two leg bones that pair, so that with the exception of the third skull, these may be the bones of the aforesaid kings. 

Third and fourth chests, bearing the names of Canute, Rufus, Emma, Wina, Alwin, and Stigand. Neither of these contains any skull, but they are full of thigh and leg bones, one set of which, in the third chest, is much smaller and weaker than the rest. This with the supernumerary skull in the second chest, might possibly have belonged to queen Emma. 

The fifth chest, inscribed Edmund, contains five skulls and three or four thigh bones. One of the skulls, from the state of the sutures, belonged to a very old man, another also belonged to an old person; these, therefore, might have belonged to Wina and Alwin. 

The sixth chest, inscribed Edred, contains many thigh bones and two skulls. It is to be observed, that the skulls actually at present in the chests are twelve in number, which is also the number of the names inscribed on the same chests. It will also appear, from the size of the bones, that there was no difference of stature from the present age."