There were a number of religious foundations in the parish of St Cuthberts. In the suburb of Portsborough, there was a chapel dedicated to the Virgin Mary, the remains of which are still to be seen at the foot of the Chapel-wynd. In the west end of the borough-muir, there stood a large chapel, dedicated to St Roque, and round it there was a cemetery, where those in Edinburgh, who died of the plague, were interred. The town-council, A. D. 1532, granted four acres of ground in the borough-muir to Sir John Young the chaplain, for which he was bound to keep the roof and windows of the chapel in repair; but, agreeably to the general embezzlement of religious and charitable foundations which took place at the reformation, no services were performed, but the very church and church-yard converted into private property. The loss of this piece of ground is severely felt by the citizens, whose burying-ground, which lies within the city, is by no means adequate to the vast increase of the inhabitants. A considerable part of the walls of this chapel is still standing.

East from the chapel of St Roque, there was a chapel dedicated to St John the Baptist; but we are not able to ascertain the time or manner of those religious foundations. South from the Meadow was a monastery of Dominican Nuns, founded by the Lady St Clair of Roslin, and dedicated to St Catherine of Sienna. At the reformation, the magistrates of Edinburgh seized upon the revenues of the convent. The poor gentlewomen who had there been educated as nuns, who, sequestered from the world, spent their lives in devotion, within walls which they deemed sacred, were turned out upon the wide world; nor would the magistrates, till compelled by Queen Mary, allow the nuns a subsistence out of those very funds with which their own predecessors had endowed the convent. The neighbourhood of this monastery still retains its name, but corruptly, the vulgar having perverted Sienna into a phraseology suitable to themselves, the Sheens. Opposite to the late monastery of Sienna, on the east side of Newington, there is a gentle eminence, vulgarly called Mount Hooly, a corruption of the Holy Mount, or Mons facer. The place was so called, from a chapel of Knights Templars erected on it. As the knights of this order prosessed to defend the holy mount and sepulchre, and to protect pilgrims reforting to it, this branch of them, in commemoration of the grand object of their order, had bestowed on the site of their chapel the name of the Holy mount. In digging this ground fome time ago, several bodies were found, there, buried cross-legged, and having swords by their sides.