Turning our faces now to the west, we have before us the screen which separates the work of De Lucy from that of Fox. In the front of this, just before the Holy Hole, we find a large grave stone, being above twelve feet long and five feet broad, in which we can discern that the effigies of a bishop, abbot, or mitred prior, in brass, and a long inscription, with a profusion of ornaments, have been inserted, which have since been sacrilegiously stolen. This is celebrated, not only by the vulgar, but also by learned authors, as the monument which covers the remains of the great patron saint of our cathedral and city, St. Swithun. The improbability, however, of this opinion is great and obvious. This saint, it is well known, was buried, at his own request, in the church-yard, in a spot which we shall hereafter point out; and when afterwards, at the distance of above a hundred years, the body was translated by St. Ethelwold into the cathedral, it was not deposited in a grave, but in a shrine or chest of silver, plated with gold and adorned with jewels, which king Edgar gave for this purpose. The only method then of supporting the received opinion, is by supposing that, at the Reformation, some zealous person, after the shrine had been seized upon for the king's use, interred the remains of the saint under the pompous and costly monument which this appears originally to have been. Now, though we doubt not that many persons at that period were ready to incur such an expence, in order to testify their respect and devotion to this illustrious saint; yet we cannot believe that such a measure would have been permitted on the part of government; as it would have been a tacit censure of the conduct of the latter in seizing on the shrine. Such was our reasoning on this point previously to the researches made in the cathedral in 1797; which were primarily undertaken for the purpose of ascertaining the point whether St. Swithun's remains lay under this grave stone or not. We shall give below the very interesting account which the learned gentleman, to whom we have already professed our literary obligations more than once, was pleased to communicate to us of the discoveries that were made in this particular. In the mean time we shall observe, that our conjecture, in opposition to the received opinion, is now brought to an absolute certainty. For first, the bones here found lay "in an undisturbed State...every rib and joint in its proper place." Now this could not have happened, had the remains of the deceased been so often translated and moved, as certainly was the case with those of St. Swithun, during the space of six centuries. The second argument to this effect, which supercedes the necessity of producing any further proofs in support of our opinion, is, that in the grave before us was found an entire skull, whereas we have undeniable testimony, that the skull of St. Swithun was carried away by St. Elphege from Winchester to Canterbury, upon his being promoted to that see, where it was deposited under Christ's altar. If we must hazard a conjecture concerning the deceased whose remains are contained in the present sepulchre, we should say, that in all probability it is good prior Silkstede. The black serge, resembling a cowl, and the funeral boots, found with the bones, seem to bespeak a person of the monastic profession; the mitre and the crosier on the grave-stone indicate a prior of the cathedral; the white, well jointed, and polished stones in the sepulchre, resembling those in Fox's chantry, seem to point out the time when it was made; and its honourable situation, just before the Holy Hole, seems better to become a superior of Silkstede's merit as a benefactor to the cathedral, than any any other prior who lived near his time.