The most distinguished persons who were interred at Cambuskenneth were King James the Third and his spouse, Queen Margaret. The circumstances connected with their death and burial at Cambuskenneth have recently been investigated with much care and accuracy. Queen Margaret died at Stirling, and was buried in the Abbey of Cambuskenneth on the 27th of 29th of February 1486-7.

As the King fled from the field of Sauchieburn, his horse taking fright at the noise caused by a pitcher dropped from the hand of a terrified woman who was taking water from a well, he was thrown violently on the ground, and was so much injured by the fall and oppressed by the weight of his armour that he fainted. The miller and his wife rushed out of the mill, which was close by, carried him into their house and covered him with a cloth to conceal him from his enemies, who were in hot pursuit. When the unfortunate King recovered his senses he called for a priest to hear his confession. To his rustic hosts, who inquired his name, he replied, "I was your King this morning." Alarmed at the announcement, the poor woman ran out calling loudly for assistance to the King. Some of the rebels who happened to pass at the moment heard her cries, and, according to tradition, one of them, a follower of Lord Gray, a priest by profession, exclaimed, “I am a priest. Where is the King?" He was led into the room where the King lay hid, and kneeling down beside him asked if he thought he might recover by the help of surgery. "I believe that I might," answered James: "but let me have a priest to hear my confession and to bring me the eucharist." The traitor, it is said, heard his confession, and then basely stabbed him to the heart. 

The spot where this regicide was perpetrated is well known by the name of Beton's Mill, from the name of the tenant who then occupied it, and stands on the east side of Sauchieburn. It is now a dwelling-house, the lower part of the walls only being the same as when the King found shelter within them. As his Queen had shortly before been interred at Cambuskenneth, which was within a few miles of the scene of his death, his body was conveyed to the Abbey, and his funeral obsequies were solemnly performed there on the 25th of June 1488, exactly fourteen days after the battle of Sauchieburn. James the Third had appointed a chaplain to sing masses for Queen Margaret; and, after his death, his son appointed a chaplain to sing masses both for his father and mother. These duties, as appears from the payments made to the chaplains for their services, continued to be performed from the year 1488 to the year 1560, when, on the establishment of the Reformed faith, all such ceremonies were strictly forbidden.

King James the Fourth, as he advanced in years, lamented the fate of his father, and smitten, it is said, with remorse for the part which he had been led to take against him, was in the habit of wearing an iron girdle around his holy by way of penance. He also ordered masses to be performed for his father. In a charter granted by King James the Fourth, on 6th April 1496, in favour of the Abbey of Cambuskenneth, the King thus refers to the final resting-place of his parents. 

We therefore, in honour of Almighty God and of the most glorious Virgin Mary his mother, and for the welfare of the souls of our deceased most noble father and mother, James the Third and Margaret, his spouse, of happy memory, whom God assoilzie! whose bodies rest in our said Monastery, and for prayers to be offered up for them, and for us and our successors, for ever, approve, ratify, and confirm the gift conferred on the Abbey.

From a feeling of reverence for the memory of his parents, King James the Fourth, long after the battle of Sauchieburn, intended that his own mortal remains should rest in the Abbey of Cambuskenneth, and between the years 1501 and 1511 employed workers in stone and marble, painters and artists, to construct a lair or place of burial in the Abbey; and various payments to them appear in the accounts of the Treasurer. 

[...]

According to tradition, King James the Third and his Queen were buried at the high altar of the Abbey of Cambuskenneth. This spot was long believed to be indicated by a large thorn-tree, which has been specially mentioned by a traveller in Scotland as marking the royal graves. It was blown down by a gale of wind, after which a branch grew up close to the site of the original thorn. This thorn served to guide the excavators who, on the 2 May 1864, began the exploration of the foundation of the Abbey. The results, so far as relates to the discovery of the royal graves, are thus recorded by Colonel Sir James E. Alexander:— 

“Between the high altar and the thorn-tree a slab of coarse blue marble, or mountain limestone, lay under the soil: it was in a slanting position, as if disturbed formerly; one corner of it was broken off, and it was also cracked across. What remained of the slab measured about five feet square and seven inches thick. It had a hewn margin, and was hewn as a panel across its rough face. This was the usual royal tablet stone seen at Dunfermline, Dunblane, etc. On close inspection batholes were seen with lead in them; these had held the monumental brass of which two portions were found, the one with the figure of a flower on it, the other marked with cross lines; the larger portion, with the inscription, had been torn off and removed. 

“It was resolved to look for a vault under the slab. It was accordingly raised, and on digging down a few feet a large oak coffin was found, the feet touching the enclosure of the high altar, the head to the west. Inside the coffin was a skeleton, doubtless that of King James the Third. On being exposed to the air most of the bones crumbled to dust; some remained, fragments of the skull and of the lower jaw, two molar teeth, thigh bones, etc. Moist clay surrounded the coffin, and this doubtless was the cause of its being preserved so long. The pieces of the coffin which remained showed the grain of the wood, oak, which probably was obtained from the neighbouring Torwood. On the left of the male bones were those of a female, and also those of a child. The three bodies had been disturbed before, perhaps for the purpose of plundering them of such ornaments as had been deposited with them. A small coffin ornament of metal was found, in shape like a flower. The bones were carefully laid aside for re-interment." 

The attention of Queen Victoria having been directed to the circumstances connected with the discovery of the remains of her ancestor King James the Third, her Majesty was graciously pleased to command that a suitable monument should be erected by Mr. Robert Matheson, Assistant-Surveyor of Works at Edinburgh. The monument having been completed, the remains of King James and his Queen were carefully deposited in a sarcophagus, and the mason work of the tomb finished on Saturday the 23d of September 1865. It is of fine freestone, four and a half feet in height, eight feet in length, four and a half feet in breadth at the base, and three feet at the top. On the south side is the following inscription :- 

IN THIS PLACE, NEAR TO THE HIGH ALTAR OF THE ABBEY OF CAMBUSKENNETI, WERE DEPOSITED THE REMAINS OF JAMES THE THIRD, KING OF SCOTS. WHO DIED ON THE 11TH OF JUNE 1488, AND OF HIS QUEEN, THE PRINCESS MARGARET OF DENMARK. On the north side- THIS RESTORATION OF THE TOMB OF HER ANCESTORS WAS EXECUTED BY COMMAND OF HER MAJESTY QUEEN VICTORIA, A.D. 1865.

On the east end of the monument are sculptured the Royal Arms of Scotland, the Red Lion on a field of gold, surmounted by a crown and supported by unicorns, with the motto-In Defence. On the west end are the Royal Arms of Scotland impaled with those of Denmark, surmounted by a crown, and surrounded by a wreath of thistles. On the top there is carved an antique Cross. 