L’Abbaie aux Hommes, was erected by the Conqueror, who died, and was buried within the church he built, in 1087: his tomb was erected at the cost of William Rufus, and richly decorated with gold, silver, and jewels, under the direction of Odo, a goldsmith of Caen. The tomb was supported on each side by three pilasters of white marble. This monument was destroyed during the wars of the Hugonots. What remains of the Conqueror’s bones, are still preserved in St. Stephen’s; they rest under a flat stone in the choir of the church. There is a very interesting account given of the destruction of the tomb by Charles de Bourgueville, Sieur de Bras, a French writer, who witnessed the event. He tells us, that two magnificent monuments, of Duke William, and his Duchess Matilda, were broken to pieces by the rabble, one being in the Abbaie aux Hommes, and the other in the Abbaie aux Dames. The Hugonots, believing the tomb of the Conqueror contained some treasure, broke it open, and found the bones within, enveloped in red silk, the colour being still apparent; the bones were of an extraordinary large size, and had every appearance of being those of a very strong man. Not content with this devastation, the mob next tore down a curious picture of the Conqueror, painted on wood, representing him exactly in the dress in which he was buried. This picture had been painted from the body in the year 1522, by order of Pierre de Martigny, bishop of Castres, and abbot of Caen, when an archbishop, a bishop, and a lord-cardinal of Rome visited the city, who, desiring to see the body of William, they caused the tomb to be opened, and found the Conqueror’s remains exactly in the state in which they had been interred. An epitaph was discovered within the tomb; this epitaph had been copied at the bottom of the picture on wood, which, the same writer informs us, was afterwards used for a table by a low person in Caen, from whom he obtained it. The Holy Trinity was founded by Matilda, A.D. 1082. It is a fine building, and a perfect specimen of the architecture of the time; as it is now converted into a manufactory, the interior of the church has been spoiled, by the erection of a floor, to make two divisions for apartments, one above, and the other beneath. The lid of Matilda’s stone coffin, bearing a curious inscription, was recently found in this church, and has lately been removed to the Abbais aux Hommes; it is of grey marble, and so plain in its appearance, that an indifferent observer would never suspect it was intended to cover royalty, the inscription arranged in lines upon it is its only ornament. The following is a correct copy of the inscription, with all its  abbreviations and singularities: —  

Egregie pulchri tegit hec structura sepulchri   
Moribus insigne germen regale Mathildem  
Dux flandrita pater huic extitit Adala mater  
Francorum gentis Rotberti filia regis  
Et soror Henrici regalis sede potiti  
Regi magnifico Willelmo juncta marito  
Presentem sedem presente fecit et sedem  
Tam multis terris qua multis rebus honestis  
A se ditatam se procurante dicatam  
Hec consolatrix inopum pietatis amatrix  
Gazis dispersis pauper sibi dives egenis  
Sic infinite petiit consortia vite ;  
In prima mensis post primam luce Novembris. 

['"The stately structure of this beautiful tomb covers
Matilda of royal lineage, distinguished by her customs.
The Duke of Flanders stood forth as a father for her, Adela as a mother
daughter of King Robert of the Frankish people
and sister to Henry that ruled the royal throne.
Joined with in marriage to King William the magnificent
she made this site and church preeminent
with many lands and with many good things, 
enriched by her or procured through her care.
This consoler of the weak and lover of piety,
she dispersed wealth to the poor, her own riches to the needy.
Thus she sought consolation of the eternal life on the first of the month of November after the first day [i.e. the second day]."']

At the time this coffin lid was discovered, they found also a coffin, in the centre of the under croft, containing the bones of a superior of the convent, with whose remains they discovered many very curious antiquities, amongst them a pastoral staff: the chead or crook being of copper, small in size; the ball at its base was formed of amber; also a ring with an inscription upon it in the inside, two small square leaden boxes; and some fragments of linen were likewise found. It has been conjectured that these bones were the remains of Cevilia, daughter of the Conqueror, who was the first abbess of this house. At the time the Hugonots destroyed the monument of Matilda, it is said a ring of sapphire, set in gold, was taken from her hand; this ring was in the possession of the abbess of the convent who gave it to the Baron de Canty, constable of France, in the reign of Charles IX.