The church of Holyrood-house suffered considerably when the English burned down the palace, upon their invasion by sea, A. D. 1544. However, both church and palace were speedily repaired. At the restoration, King Charles having resolved to rebuild the palace, and, at the same time to give the church a compleat repair, ordered that it should be set apart as a chapel-royal, in all time coming, discharging it from being used as the parish-church of the Canongate, which it had hitherto been. It was accordingly fitted up in a very elegant manner. A throne was erected for the Sovereign, and twelve stalls for the knights of the order of the Thistle; but, as it was accommodated with an organ, and, as mass had been celebrated in it, in the reign of James VII. the populace giving vent to their fury at the revolution, despoiled the ornaments of the inside of the church, leaving nothing but the bare walls. They even broke into the vault which had been used as the royal sepulchre, in which lay the bodies of King James V, of Magdalene of France, his first queen, of the Earl of Darnley, and others of the monarchs and royal family of Scotland. They broke open the lead coffins, carried off the lids, but left the rest. These walls, which could withstand the fury of a mob, have since been brought to the ground, through the extreme avarice or stupidity of an architect.

As the roof of the church was becoming ruinous, the Duke of Hamilton, heritable keeper of the palace, represented its condition to the Barons of Exchequer, and craved that it might be repaired. To this effect an architect and mason were consulted. The walls of the church were already upwards of six hundred years old, and were but in a crazy condition; yet did these men propose, in stead of putting a slate roof on it, to cover it with flag-stones, to support which, a deal of stone-work would be necessary about the roof, and about which it would be difficult to follow and judge of the estimate of the architects. They accordingly gave in a plan and estimate of the work, amounting to L. 1003, which was approven of by the Barons of Exchequer, 7th August 1758. The new roof soon injured the fabrick. A report was made to the Barons by another architect, in A. D. 1766, that the church would speedily become ruinous, if the new roof was not taken off, as the walls had never been intended for so vast a load. Nothing was done in consequence of this report, and the church fell on the 2d December 1768.

When we lately visited it, we saw, in the middle of the chapel, the broken shafts of the columns which had been borne down by the weight of the roof. Upon looking into the vaults, the doors of which were open, we found, that what had escaped the fury of the mob, at the revolution, became a prey to the rapacity of the mob, who ran sacked the church after it fell. In A. D. 1776, we had seen the body of James V. and some others, in their leaden coffins. The coffins were now stolen. The head of Queen Magdalene, which was then entire, and even beautiful, and the skull of Darnley, were also stolen. His thigh-bones, however, still remain, and are proofs of the vastness of his stature. In the belfry, there are a marble monument and statue of Robert Lord Belhaven, who died A. D. 1639. The figure is reclining at full length, and the execution is masterly, being inferior to few of the monuments in Westminster abbey. It has suffered somewhat by the fall of the church; part of the nose is broke off, and some joists, which are hanging loose in the belfry, threaten, in their fall, to demolish it.