"Sir, 

Your absence at the time we had obtained leave to make some researches in the cathedral, was a matter of great regret, both to my father, Capt. Cartwright, and myself, and I will add to the vergers of the cathedral, who assisted us: and had we not been under orders to march to this place, we should certainly have delayed the investigation till your return. As it is, the best thing remaining to do, is to give you an account of our transactions, and as I write to a person so much better informed, both as to the history of the place and every local circumstance, I shall confine myself to a bare narration of the facts.

St. Swithun's Tomb. — Previous to our operations we ascertained, both by measurement and by sound in the crypt, that the large square of solid stone, towards the middle of the vault, is immediately under St. Swithin's tomb. There is a square flint solid beyond it carried up in the same manner, but which appears to have been made merely to support the arch above, between the monuments of cardinal Beaufort and bishop Waynflete, as on removing the pavement above it in the church, we immediately came to that arch. 

On the 5th of July, leave having been obtained, the slab, 12 feet by 5, supposed to cover St. Swithin's tomb, was raised, under the direction of the master mason of the chapter, in the presence of several gentlemen, and of two of the vergers of the cathedral. 

Under this stone there appeared an oblong tomb or opening, seven feet long and two feet five inches broad, formed of slabs of a fine white stone, (similar to that used in bishop Fox's chapel, neatly polished, jointed with care and art, and as clean and dry as if it had been finished on that day. The rubbish, consisting of pulverised stone and some decayed mortar, with which it had probably been filled to the level of the underpart of the great slab, was rather sunk towards the centre, apparently on account of its having, (as we afterwards discovered) burst into the coffin itself. After removing two feet five inches of this rubbish, the flat lid of an oak coffin appeared. The wood was moist, and in a state of the utmost decay, soft, spungy, and light, and easily broken, but still retaining to the eye its fibres and texture. The lid has been fastened with common iron nails, much rust-eaten, and which came out at the touch. The form of the coffin, or rather chest, which contained the bones, was a parellogram, about six feet and a half long, one foot ten inches broad, and not quite one foot deep. In some places, (as has been related) it was broken into by the weight of the rubbish, which in consequence was found mixed with the bones. There was no lead in the inside, nor any inscription. The bones lay in an undisturbed state; the jaw and every rib and joint were in their places, the hands were crossed a little below the short ribs, but no ring was found, nor were there any coins or chalice. The vertebre of the back, and the smaller bones which lay next the under part of the coffin, were much decayed, but the thigh, leg, and arm bones were still solid. The thigh bones measured from the extreme points only 18¾ inches, which proves that whoever is here buried was a person of low stature. On the skull, which is also small, there remained the impression of linen, or fine stuff, apparently white, but no hair. Many of the teeth were entire, but much worn; others, from the closure of the jaw bone, appeared to have been lost during life. A black serge, probably a monk's cowl, seems to have covered the whole body, and upon the decay of the flesh to have adhered to the bones; towards the feet it appeared in folds. The legs were covered with leather boots or gaiters, sewed on and neatly stitched; part of the thread was still be seen, and the leather retained some consistency; it was very damp, I might almost say wet. The soles were of what would be called an elegant shape at present, pointed at the toe and very narrow under the middle of the foot, exactly the shape of what I have sent, which you will observe is so small that it scarcely appears the size of a man's foot. The under part is a good deal worn, of two thicknesses of leather, about the consistency of a slipper sole. There were remains of thongs near it, which may lead to suppose they were sandals. The boot part, which is very wide, and came above the knee, was not adherent to these soles. The lower part of the coffin, which was very damp, and like the rest, falling to pieces, adhered in some degree to the bottom of the stone grave, and had stained it; the rest was, as I have said, perfectly fresh and clean. The depth of this tomb or stone grave was 3 feet 4 inches. Whether these circumstances support the tradition that this was the body of St. Swithun, you will be able to judge better than myself; one thing appears to me certain, that the coffin was removed from some other place to this spot, and had existed long before bishop Fox's time; it was certainly not by the dry rot that it had decayed in the situation it was placed, totally void of moisture; it could not have decayed by any other manner since his time. One must therefore conclude that these remains were at least reputed to be those of some person of great note, that the coffin or chest must have then been in a very perishable state, and have required great care in the removal, more indeed than succeeded, as the weight even of the dusty materials that covered it had broken into it. 

To conclude, the remains were immediately after carefully collected, and placed in a box at the bottom of the vault, with a short narrative of the proceedings of the day inclosed in a glass bottle sealed up, the rubbish thrown in, and the slab replaced in its former state. 

- Henry Howard." 

Hilsea Barracks, July 12, 1797. 