The church [of Christ Church, London] was reckoned one of the most superb of the conventual; and rose by the contributions of the opulent devout. Margaret, daughter of Philip the Hardy, and second queen to Edward I. in 1306 began the choir. Isabella, queen to Edward II. gave threescore and ten pounds; and queen Philippa, wife of Edward III. gave threescore and two pounds, towards the building. John de Bretagne, duke of Richmond, built the body of the church, at a vast expence: and Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester, gave twenty great beams out of his forest at Tunbridge. No order of monks seems to have had the powers of persuasion equal to these poor friars. They raised vast sums for their buildings among the rich: and there were few of their admirers, when they came to die, who did not console themselves with the thoughts of lying. Within their expiating walls; and, if they were particularly wicked, thought themselves secure against the assault of the devil, provided their corpse was wrapped in the habit and cowl of a friar.

Multitudes therefore of all ranks were crowded in this holy ground. It boasts of receiving four queens; Margaret, and Isabella, above mentioned; Joan, daughter to Edward II. and wife of Edward Bruce, king of Scotland; and, to make the fourth, Isabella wife of William Warren, titular queen of Man, is named. Of these, Isabella, whom GRAY so strongly stigmatizes, She-wolf of France, with unrelenting fangs, That tear'st the bowels of thy mangled mate, I hope was wrapped in the friars garment, for few stood more in need of a dæmonifuge. With wonderful hypocrisy she was buried with the heart of her murdered husband on her breast. Here also rest Beatrix, daughter of Henry III. and dutchess of Bretagny. Isabella, daughter of Edward III. and wife of Ingelram de Courcy, created earl of Bedford. John Hastings, earl of Pembroke, slain in Woodstocke-park, at a Christmas festivity, in 1389. He was then very young, and, being desirous of instruction in feats of chivalry, ran against a stout knight of the name of John Saint John: but it remains uncertain whether his death was the result of design or accident. John Duc de Bourbon, one of the noble prisoners taken at the battle of Azincourt, after eighteen years imprisonment, in 1443 here found a tomb. Walter Blunt lord Mountjoy, lord treasurer of England in the time of Edward IV. and many other illustrious persons, were deposited here.